Good afternoon,
I’d like to acknowledge
Justice Minister Amy Adams
Maori Development Minister Te Ururoa Flavell
Distinguished members of the judiciary,
Chief executives,
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for the welcome.
And thank you all for the contributions you make to help New Zealanders lead safer and more secure lives.
It’s great to see so many people passionate about making a difference.
For most children, New Zealand is a great place to grow up.
We have a high quality education system, easy access to the outdoors and a strong culture of participation.
Most children can rely on the adults in their house, family and whanau for nurture, encouragement and support.
This helps those children to grow, flourish and be ready as adults to take advantage of all the opportunities that today’s world offers.
But we know that, unfortunately, that does not describe the growing-up that every child experiences.
For most New Zealanders, home is a sanctuary.
But for some, home can sometimes be the opposite.
It can be a place of fear, anxiety and danger.
We know that addressing social problems often means confronting issues that are distressing to deal with.
But this Government has not shied away from hard problems, particularly where we think our intervention can make a positive difference in people’s lives.
Where there is evidence that a programme of support will make a difference, Finance Minister Bill English finds the money to pay for it.
Today I want to focus on how we intend to address the harm in our society caused by repeated family violence.
This is usually, though not exclusively, perpetrated by men on their partners or former partners, and on one or more of their children.
I am going to outline for you changes we will be making to reduce this kind of cruelty.
All New Zealanders wish family violence did not happen.
Many wish that those involved might just fix it themselves.
Some families do manage to improve their circumstances, but some do not.
They need help to stop the violence and repression so they can lead healthier, happier and more fulfilling lives.
Obviously, the most important reason to help is to protect victims from the pain, fear and consequences of living in a violent household.
The sooner we stop it, the better the chance of lives being saved and of injuries being avoided; and the better the chance of adults and children living with the confidence, security and opportunities that most New Zealanders take for granted.
In addition, the greater the reduction in family violence now, the greater the chance of it not blighting another generation.
New Zealanders generally resist government interference in their private lives, and I get that.
But let me say straight up that in households where anyone is being assaulted, threatened, intimidated, belittled or deprived, the perpetrator has no right to expect privacy so they can go on being a bully.
If they won’t stop that behaviour, and the victims can’t stop it, then we must ensure that someone else stops it.
We know the effects of this type of offending are cumulative and profound.
Children subjected to family violence, and those who witness it, are at risk of serious problems with their physical and mental health, poor educational and job outcomes, drug and alcohol abuse, and homelessness.
None of this will surprise any of you here today.
This audience knows that police respond to 110,000 family violence call-outs a year.
And you know that kids are present at nearly two-thirds of these incidents.
You also know that, tragically, nearly half of all homicides are acts of family violence.
We are all aware of terrible cases where a woman has predicted, “my ex is going to kill me”, and he has.
Victims, mostly women, are often trapped because their spouses or partners have isolated them, cut them off from support and finances, and undermined their confidence.
It’s easy to think this is someone else’s problem.
But it is not someone else’s problem if you are a New Zealander who cares.
That’s why Ministers have been working together to come up with a different and better approach to family violence to get different and better results.
Everyone knows there is no single answer and the Government cannot be all of the solution.
However, we have a key role.
We have resources when victims often do not.
And we have the ability to make laws laid down by Parliament and enforced by police.
That is quite different to the laws laid down by some guy in his own home, and enforced by him.
Today I am announcing an overhaul of the family violence prevention system.
Our new approach will revolve around intervening sooner, and more effectively.
That is because the sooner we can identify problems and get victims and perpetrators the help that they need to change their lives for the better, the fewer serious assaults there will be.
We have already started with a new Integrated Safety Response pilot that is running in Christchurch, and soon to get underway in the Waikato.
This has brought in the widest range of agencies to work togetherr, share information, and assess and plan responses for every family violence notification to police.
It involves daily case triage, specialist high-risk case management, and help for perpetrators to get the services they need to change their behaviour.
We know we have developed a better way of working on behalf of the people who need us most.
It’s early days but we also know that at least one life has been saved.
The feedback so far gives us hope that with the dedication of those in the sector, and a new way of working together, we can reduce family violence across New Zealand.
That is our aim.
Justice Minister Amy Adams has been carrying out a legislative review over the past two years that has led to the changes I am outlining today.
We will create a legislative regime that is built on best practice and ensures high-risk domestic abuse can be recognised, recorded and responded to properly.
The changes I am announcing will include:
Creating a range of specific new offences to better reflect what we know about family violence. For example, new offences will include non-fatal strangulation, assault on a family member, and coercion to marry.
In situations involving family violence the safety of the victims will be made a principal consideration in all bail decisions, and central to parenting and property orders. We can therefore expect to see more abusers in custody, rather than on bail.
All family violence offending will be flagged on criminal records to ensure prior behaviour is clearly identified in all future decision making.
We know that victims often experience multiple counts of abuse before they get help so we will address barriers to getting protection orders — such as simplifying forms and providing advice. In addition, others will be able to apply on the victim’s behalf where the victim is too fearful.
We will enable police to refer at-risk families to a service provider to carry out risk and needs assessments and people will be able to refer themselves to the same services.
Freeing up information sharing between family violence prevention agencies and professionals will help make assistance quicker and more responsive.
A wider range of support services will be available to perpetrators upon the issuing of protection orders.  We want to stop abuse, not only to protect victims, of course, but also because the single biggest predictor of children growing up to be either abusers of their own partners, or victims of their partners, is if they themselves grew up in a home where such abuse occurred.
These new measures will cost around $130 million over four years.
We expect the first round of legislation implementing these changes to be introduced to Parliament early next year.
These changes are by no means the end of creating the effective, prevention-focused system that we aspire to — but they will provide its essential building blocks.
It will take time for services to be redesigned to appropriately meet the needs of the range of victims and perpetrators of family violence, and for the necessary capacity to be built.
We also need to ensure these services are integrated with existing initiatives like children’s teams.
These changes have the potential to significantly reduce family violence.
The increase in protection orders alone is expected to lead to 1200 fewer violent offences each year.
The increased imprisonment of violent offenders is expected to prevent a further 1100 violent offences per year.
These will be significant gains.
We know that half of all young people exposed to family violence will themselves be on a benefit before they turn 19.
We know that boys who witness family violence are twice as likely to grow up to abuse their own partners and children.
We know the cost of such violence to individuals, families, neighbourhoods and our country.
So we also know that every step we take to reduce this level of harm is worthwhile.
I want to personally make a couple more points, very plainly.
First, I want to say to victims: you are not alone.
You deserve and are entitled to a life free from fear, and your children deserve and are entitled to that too. Help is available.
Secondly, to the perpetrators of this misery I say this: recognise what is going on in your home and take responsibility for it.
A good father, a good step-father and a good man does not hit, intimidate or control his spouse, partner, ex-partner or her children. The same goes for women who are abusers.
You do not create a better family by hitting them, belittling them, or by making them live in fear of you.
You do not own your spouse, your partner, your ex-partner, your children or your step-children.
If you act in a violent and controlling way, you can change that behaviour.
Own the problem.
Nothing will get better until you do.
Ask for help. There is no shame in that.
This audience knows that family violence is not restricted to the poorest communities, or only to violence by men against women.
A quarter of women who live in a home that earns over $100,000 a year have experienced physical or sexual violence from their partner.
Around one in four women with a university education have been assaulted.
20 per cent of all adults experience violence at the hands of their partner at some point in their lifetime.
Kids from abusive homes are three times more likely to end up in violent juvenile offending and three times more likely to try to take their own lives.
Just as the effects of family violence are widely felt, so is the challenge of reducing family violence widely shared — by the Government, the police, social agencies, families and by everyone who knows that violence is occurring, including those who are inflicting it.
None of us should be deterred by the difficulty of the problem. Rather we should be motivated by the positive difference we can make.
Today’s announcement is consistent with the additional steps this Government has already taken to support New Zealanders.
The principle that people want to be independent and self-supporting, but that the Government should be there for Kiwis when they need it, has guided the Cabinet, and me as Prime Minister, over the past eight years.
We have taken a wide range of steps that are making a real difference to New Zealanders who need a hand, especially in raising their families.
This includes spending about $24 billion in support and benefits to help those who struggle to get by under their own steam.
Last year, we became the first Government in 43 years to increase welfare benefits.
We also increased Working for Families payments to low-income families not on a benefit and increased paid parental leave to 18 weeks to help families with a new baby.
We’re setting up a new Ministry of Vulnerable Children to focus on the care and protection of our most vulnerable young citizens.
We’ve made 300,000 homes warmer and drier.
Our Kickstart Breakfast programme has served up 7 million breakfasts for kids going to school.
On top of this, we’ve introduced free GP visits for kids under 13.
So, increasing support in practical ways for those who need a hand has been a consistent theme of this Government and has been well supported by New Zealanders since we were first elected.
If this focus has surprised some commentators, it should not have.
In 2007, I stood up in the Burnside Rugby Clubrooms in Christchurch and made a speech about defining the sort of country I wanted New Zealand to be.
At the heart of that speech was the belief that every New Zealander deserves a fair chance in life.
A belief that all kids should have the kind of start that will enable them to make the most of their potential, and the most of the opportunities out there in the world today.
That does not mean that kids need to have everything.
No kid needs everything.
But they all need love, care and encouragement in order to flourish, and those can only be provided in homes where children feel safe and secure, because they are safe and secure.
Ministers in this Government are united in condemning abuse in the home.
All kinds of abuse.
Nothing justifies it. Nothing excuses it.
Succeeding in reducing family violence will save lives, and transform lives.
For some, it will feel like a new life.
There is so much to be gained.
This Government intends being part of the solution. I am sure you do too.
Thank you.
It’s always a good sign when a service provider takes steps to upgrade their offering without some complaint or customer pressure to improve.
That’s what’s happened here – the policy community has decided to lift their game without being asked to.
I initially wondered why we needed the Policy Project – I was pretty happy with the service I was getting.
 But there is always room for continuous improvement and innovation.
I am delighted that my department took a leadership role in collaboration with policy leaders from other departments, to improve the quality of policy advice across government. 
I’m impressed with the Policy Project frameworks being launched today.
They provide great infrastructure for government departments to improve the business of providing advice.
I can see how they will help you to do your job better.
A few weeks ago I met with the Tier 2 Policy Leaders group – a network of deputy chief executives with policy responsibilities - that has championed the Policy Project and these frameworks.
I know that Bill English and Paula Bennett have done the same.
We all appreciated the opportunity to have a conversation with the senior policy community about current and future policy issues, and about what we expect from policy advisors.
The Better Public Services reforms are all about more joined up government and the Policy Project is an important catalyst.
Any good business thinks about the future – about maintaining and building capability to continuously improve its offering to customers.
In the business of providing advice that means investing in your key asset – people.
You need to be able to attract the best and brightest, to hold on to them, to develop and grow them, and to ensure a good crop of future leaders.
Succession planning is not only smart – it’s an essential business strategy.
Senior policy staff need to be preparing others to step into their shoes.
The Policy Skills Framework provides a foundation for building a strong group of skilled policy advisors.
It sets out what we need from policy staff - people who can work with and through others, have the skills to back up their advice with good evidence, and can translate ministerial ambition into real action on the ground.
Today I’m going to talk about why the advice that the public service offers matters for good governance.
I’m going to cover what makes the relationship between ministers and their advisors work well and why it’s important that departments invest in long term thinking.
One of the foundation stones of our democracy is a strong, politically neutral public service that helps the government achieve its objectives.
In an increasingly complex world, good advice matters more than ever for effective government.
New Zealand is fortunate in the calibre of people who are attracted into the public service.
They have helped successive administrations steer our country through difficult problems, seize opportunities and position us as a confident, outward looking, open and optimistic country.
We are making good progress in a world full of challenges.
I have always valued the free and frank advice I receive from my officials.
They point out the risks and pitfalls of the choices we face, in a constructive and helpful way. 
They are proactive problems solvers too – they come up with alternative approaches to help us achieve our goals.
I think in opposition it’s easy to underestimate how difficult it is to solve the problems that really matter.
Most choices involve trade-offs and there are seldom easy solutions.
To really understand those trade-offs, you need high quality advice.
Governing is about making choices because we can’t do everything that we want to do.
Great advice helps us cut through to what is most important.
Ministers of course, get advice from lots of people.
That’s as it should be in our open democracy.
The advice we get from officials is valuable because they work in partnership with us, while being independent from the politics.
That means they can give us an unvarnished view about how to best achieve our goals.
I want to say a few words about what makes the relationship between ministers and officials work well.
The foundation of that relationship is trust, confidence and mutual respect.
Officials build ministers’ trust and confidence by showing that they understand the government’s political priorities and are committed to helping us find the best way to achieve them.
Advisors need to know their subject – I want to hear from people who really understand and have thought about an area.
It takes a lot of confidence to be the only person in a room of ministers to raise a problem, or advise against the preferred option.
Ministers need to listen carefully and respectfully too.
In my experience, confident ministers value hard-hitting advice even if they may not act on it.
My ministers know that I expect them to behave in a professional way toward everyone they deal with, including officials who may be giving them, at times, unwelcome advice.
There is a strong public interest in ministers receiving this advice because it makes for better decisions.
It’s one of the strengths of our constitutional tradition of an independently appointed public service.
Officials should actively poke holes in things in the interests of getting a better decision.
When it comes to taking significant decisions, I expect departments to provide their free and frank advice in writing.
Written advice is fuller, allows for more nuance, and can better cover the complexities of the trade-offs we face.
It also allows ministers time for reflection and to work through a problem in stages with officials to come to better solutions.
I’m also comfortable with ministers proactively releasing more Cabinet papers, and the research and evidence that supports them, once decisions have been taken.
It really shouldn’t be a big story when ministers and officials disagree – that’s the system working.
Officials’ advice should avoid second-guessing the politics of the choices we face.
As Bill English has on occasion remarked, leave the politics to the politicians – that’s our job.
But I expect officials to understand the political context in which we are operating.
The policy project frameworks we are celebrating today have some great pointers on how officials can demonstrate political savvy while keeping out of the politics.
One of the things that becomes most scarce when you are in power is the time to think deeply.
There is no doubt that the pace at which we have to manage issues has sped up dramatically even in the time my government has been in office.
The social media revolution has upended the news business – information spreads almost instantaneously.
Events can escalate quickly during a relentless 24 hour media cycle, now super-charged by social media.
There are a lot of great things about these new ways of communicating – but there are considerable downsides too.
Those of you with teenage children will know that social media eats your attention span.
One commentator put it well recently when he said that while technology has made us more connected, it has also truncated our thinking time.
It puts a premium on an immediate response, on tasks and information, but not on reflection.
But sometimes when we reach for a quick fix solution, we close off better options.
Sometimes patience, or even constructive delay while we assess more enduring solutions is a better path.
One of the most valuable things that officials can do is filter out some of this noise and pressure, and help ministers focus on longer term considerations.
We need creative thinkers who will challenge us out of status quo thinking and encourage us to take risks in the interests of better long term outcomes.
Otherwise we may face what one commentator has called “the slow migration of discontent from the fringes to the centre.”
Popularism – advocating easy sounding but unworkable solutions like turning the clock back to an imagined golden age or blaming immigrants for all our problems – is not the answer.
Great advice from officials helps ministers balance the needs of today with longer term goals so we can govern better for future generations as well as today.
In 2013 we took an important step towards embedding this type of thinking in public service departments through the amendments we made to the State Sector Act, passed with the support of the Opposition.
A key change we made was to make stewardship a formal responsibility of public service chief executives.
Chief executives are now responsible to their minister for the stewardship of their department, defined as the active planning and management of medium and long term interests.
That includes their department’s ability to offer free and frank advice to successive governments.
It underlines the importance we attach to deep, robust, politically neutral advice.
To be able to fulfil this responsibility, public service chief executives will need to be able to advise their ministers on future risks and opportunities in their portfolio areas.
This will require them to invest an appropriate amount of policy, research and strategic resource in exploring options and solutions.
They will also need to be thinking about what priorities a future government may have.
This means that they will need to have a depth of knowledge about issues which might not be on their minister’s current agenda.
While I hold ministers to account for delivering the priorities of today, they also have a responsibility to ensure their departments are thinking about the challenges of tomorrow.
I expect ministers to engage constructively with their chief executives in making space for longer term thinking.
Ministers and CEs need to balance current priorities with the investment in research, analysis and the deep subject matter expertise and capability needed to provide robust advice about future risks and opportunities.
Being a policy official in a government department isn’t the same as working in a research institute or a think-tank, however. 
Sometimes it’s much more like a just-in-time service.
When ministers need advice, it can be at short notice because the terrain has shifted and we want to seize an opportunity or better manage a risk.
That’s when the investment in deep thinking needs to be paired with agility to spot the moment and make the most of it.
And robust and durable policy is often made through frequent conversations.
The best officials are skilled at testing and retesting direction with their minister.
In the language of the Policy Project’s new skills framework, they are adept at “gaining clarity from ministers and senior leaders on desired outcomes, scope and appetite for risk.”
As well as the deep thinkers, some of the best advisors are also strategic opportunists – they seize the moment through a well-timed conversation or a short piece of advice which points out a chance to shift the dial.
Great policy-making is a creative process – and it’s definitely something we get better at over time.
The best officials also help ministers ensure that issues don’t fall through the gaps between departments.
Many policy problems modern governments face are complex ones with no single cause. They don’t lend themselves to easy linear solutions.
Today’s ‘wicked’ problems are a challenge to our public management system which is set up to provide very clear lines of accountability from chief executive to minister.
Both departments and ministers can get too captured by the status quo, even when that status quo isn’t delivering.
For example, people don’t experience problems in their lives in the tidy compartments that we deliver public services in.
Often it’s not just one problem -  a child is not behaving well at school, the family is under financial stress because the rent is too high, and someone’s drinking more than is healthy for them as a way of coping.
We will fail these families if our public services continue to work in silos.
Our front line staff understand this – that’s why the drive to connect services up has come from the people who are delivering them.
We are trying out new ways of tackling the hardest challenges.
For example, the investment approach which the Welfare Working Group borrowed from ACC and applied to welfare spending, is now being widened out to other areas such social housing, justice and vulnerable children.
It helps address a difficult problem for governments.
Most governments want to prevent problems before they start – I’ve lost count of the briefings I’ve read on the benefits of early intervention.
But it’s very hard to actually move the system away from what it has always done – shifting the state from being the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff to the fence at the top.
The investment approach gives us a concrete way of measuring the benefits of intervening early to make the case for changing where we put public money.
It requires us to value the future in the decisions we take now – and we are now starting to roll this approach out across the social sector.
This kind of innovative thinking is an example of the sort of robust and durable advice that ministers need to shift the dial on some long standing problems.
I want advice that challenges us and encourages us to think laterally.
I’m confident that as the issues we face in government become more complex, the public service will up its game.
That’s why I think the tools the policy project has developed are so important.
Now let’s celebrate what you’ve achieved so far.
Congratulations on developing the infrastructure for continuously improving the business of policy advice.
I look forward to seeing the results.
Good afternoon.
It’s great to be here today, at the Zealandia wildlife sanctuary in the heart of our capital city.
It’s an important place for New Zealand and it tells an important story.
It shows that, as Sir Paul Callaghan said shortly before his passing, we can bring back our native wildlife to our main islands.
This was once thought to be impossible.
But Zealandia has been remarkably successful in achieving its conservation goals, and inspiring many similar efforts around the country.
New Zealanders should be incredibly proud of these efforts.
Because as we know there are many things that make New Zealand special.
Our people and our outlook, our culture, our place at the bottom of the South Pacific, our tolerance and our sense of fair play.
But without doubt one of the most remarkable and remarked upon is our unique environment.
It truly is world class.
It draws people and praise from around the world.
It provides an unrivalled way of life and it helps forge our sense of national identity.
This includes our beaches and mountains, our lakes and rivers, our marine life and our native birds.
We are proud of our kiwi and kakapo, our tui and our takahe.
They are unique to New Zealand, evolving in isolation over millions of years in a world without mammals to prey upon them.
It’s what makes them not only special but also extremely vulnerable to introduced predators.
And they must be better protected.
Because while we rank among the best in the world on almost all environmental indicators, where we can improve is on biodiversity - by giving our native wildlife better protection.
In the past we have seen some of our native species forced into extinction.
And while there was once a time when the greatest threat was deforestation and poaching, today it is those introduced predators.
Their impact cannot be overstated – rats, stoats and possums kill around 25 million of our native birds every year.
And they threaten our economy and our primary sector, with their total economic cost estimated at around $3.3 billion a year.
It is our collective responsibility to do more to address this.
As we know New Zealanders take our responsibility as stewards of our environment seriously.
There have been a great many Kiwis – including many of you here - who have played extraordinary roles in this regard.
Passionate, committed, knowledgeable, and able to inspire others to join your causes.
As a Government we spend a lot of time emphasising our economic stewardship.
But I’m equally proud of our environmental stewardship.
The two are linked.
Our strong economy has enabled the Government to systematically set about improving the way we care for all aspects of our environment.
We recognised that too many of our fresh water bodies had been slowly degrading for generations.
Our response wasn’t to try and undo a century of damage in a year or a term, imposing unbearable costs on our regional communities in the process.
Instead we committed to halting that decline and steadily and surely improving those waterways.
We are the first Government to set national water quality standards and we have increased spending on fresh water improvement ten-fold.
And we are working with communities and scientists to make some very significant improvements in places like the Rotorua lakes, Lake Taupo and Lake Brunner.
We are also taking huge steps to better protect our oceans.
Like our forests and fresh waterways, New Zealanders place great value on our coasts and oceans.
They are an important part of our culture, economy and environment and we are committed to managing them sustainably.
To do that we have introduced robust laws for ensuring economic activity in the EEZ meets world’s best practice.
In 2008 our territorial waters had 33 marine reserves covering 12,800 square kilometres. 
Today we have 44 such reserves covering more than 17,000.
We are also expanding and diversifying the nature of the protection we offer through the creation of recreational fishing parks.
And we have recognised that some environments are so special and so untouched they should remain that way forever.
That is why we are creating the world’s largest fully protected ocean sanctuary.
The Kermadec/Rangitāhua Ocean Sanctuary will cover an area twice the size of  New Zealand’s total landmass and one of the most biologically and geologically diverse in the world.
It is a globally significant conservation effort which New Zealanders should be incredibly proud of.
Because it belongs to all of us and to all of the generations that follow us.
It is a real demonstration of New Zealanders’ commitment to the stewardship of our environment.
In New Zealand that stewardship is not just the preserve of Governments.
There are hundreds of important conservation projects around the country, led by communities, NGOs and the private sector.
All up, more than 7000 hectares of the New Zealand mainland as well as more than 150 offshore islands are now completely free of predators. 
On top of this, a further 1 million hectares of conservation land are under sustained predator control.
DOC, local councils and community conservation groups do an amazing job protecting what we have and pushing back against rats, stoats and possums.
But we want to go much further.
We want every part of our parks, forests and urban green spaces to be teeming with life.
We want our native wildlife to be able to flourish and for New Zealand to show the world what sort of conservation gains are possible when there is the will and the way to make it happen.
That’s why I am today announcing we have adopted the goal of a Predator Free New Zealand.
By 2050 every single part of New Zealand will be completely free of rats, stoats and possums.
This is the most ambitious conservation project attempted anywhere in the world, but we believe if we all work together as a country we can achieve it.
It will require an extraordinary effort.
It will take the reach and leadership of the Government, the funding of philanthropists and the energy of local communities and iwi.
And it will require significant advances in the technical know-how of our scientists.
We will harness all of those to deliver on our pledge.
It won’t be easy – there’s a reason Sir Paul described it as “New Zealand’s Apollo project” – but it can be done.
So the Crown will initially invest $28 million over four years to establish a new joint venture company called Predator Free New Zealand Ltd to drive the programme, alongside the private sector.
It will be up and running by early next year and be responsible for identifying large, high value predator control projects and attracting co-investors to boost their scale and success.
The Government will look to provide funding for suppression and eradication projects on a one for two basis.
That is for every $2 committed by local councils and the private sector, the Government will contribute another dollar.
We know that the funding is there.
Already councils spend around $10 million per year on pest control, along with millions from the philanthropic sector – organisations like the NEXT Foundation - and the $60 to $80 million every year from the Government.
We must acknowledge from the outset that we don’t yet have all the technology needed to meet our goal.
Therefore science has a critical role to play and New Zealand’s top researchers in the natural sciences will be needed.
The Biological Heritage National Science Challenge is set up to look for ways to protect and manage our biodiversity and biosecurity, with the Government providing almost $26 million over five years.
This challenge will be a key partner in Predator Free New Zealand.
This project is hugely ambitious and long-term.
So we have broken it down into stages.
Initially we will look to:
Increase the amount of New Zealand covered by predator control;
Establish regional partnerships and support community led initiatives;
Improve the tools we have to do the job;
Establish more areas of complete elimination as a base to build from; and
Invest in long term scientific breakthroughs to harness the enterprise and ingenuity of our science and business communities.
And by 2025 the Predator Free New Zealand project will see:
All introduced predators eradicated from all our offshore island nature reserves;
1 million more hectares of mainland New Zealand where predators are suppressed;
We will have shown that complete predator eradication can be achieved in areas of at least 20,000 hectares on the New Zealand mainland;
And we will have developed a breakthrough science solution capable of removing at least one small mammal predator from the mainland entirely.
All of this will help with our ultimate goals – to make New Zealand predator free by 2050.
To protect our unique and awe-inspiring environment for future generations.
And to show the world what is possible and reinforce New Zealand’s reputation as a worldwide leader in conservation.
We know it is ambitious but we are ambitious for New Zealand.
And we know we can do it because we have shown time and again what can be achieved when New Zealanders come together with the ambition, willpower and the wherewithal to make things happen.
Thank you.
Good morning,
It’s fantastic to be back here at TRENZ.
I’d like to thank the Tourism Industry Association for having me here today. 
I appreciate the great working relationship I have with Grant, Chris and the team and acknowledge all the hard work that goes into running an event like this.
It’s also great to be back in Rotorua – one of New Zealand’s best-known and best-loved tourism destinations.
Rotorua was one of the first real tourist destinations in New Zealand, and is still a must see for over a third of our international visitors.
And the region is still coming up with new ways of attracting tourists.
Just recently, my colleague and Associate Minister of Tourism, Paula Bennett, visited Crankworx - the world’s biggest mountain biking festival. 
Last year Crankworx added around $3.7 million to Rotorua’s economy, and attracted over 8,000 visitors.
And, I understand this year’s event was even more successful.
Crankworx is an example of how businesses and local government can work together to deliver great outcomes for the region.  
And I’m very proud that the Government played a role, through our Tourism Growth Partnership and Major Events Funds.
State of the Sector
Today I want to talk to you about the ongoing success of our tourism industry.
Visitor arrivals were up 10 per cent, to 3.3 million, in the year to March - which continues a record-breaking run.
Expenditure is also tracking well - up 31 per cent for the year to December 2015
The average spend per visitor is also up 19 per cent, which shows we’re attracting high-value, high-spending visitors which we’ve been targeting over the past few years.
We are also lucky in that we are experiencing growth in all our major markets. 
China is still leading the way with 34 percent more arrivals in the year to March 2016.  
Germany and the US are growing strongly and we are seeing good results in other markets such as Japan and Korea.
And for Rotorua, and many other regions around New Zealand, these visitors are supporting local businesses and helping create new jobs.
It’s amazing how far we have come since we released the Tourism 2025 framework in October 2013.
Since then, international arrivals have increased 21 per cent, international visitor spend has grown 47 per cent, and five per cent more people are directly employed in the tourism industry.
And that growth is set to continue.
To give you some perspective, it took us 13 years to get from 2 to 3 million visitors but if our current growth rate continues, it’s likely we’ll get to 4 million international visitors within next four years.
As an industry, you should feel enormously proud of your achievements.
Chris talked earlier this week about how well you are tracking against your ambitious Tourism 2025 targets.
He talked about taking stock of what you as an industry have achieved two years on, and setting some new priorities to focus on.
I am very supportive of that approach. 
The Tourism 2025 framework continues to provide the industry with a coherent and coordinated way of thinking about the issues you face.
But the time is certainly right for you to take a fresh look at what you want to achieve over the coming years. 
Together, we need to acknowledge that our success in achieving such rapid growth in visitor numbers does throw up some new challenges for us to address.
Looking ahead
Looking forward, it’s important to have a clear view about what success looks like.
For me, success means attracting high-value, high spending visitors who come throughout the year, have a great time, come back again, and tell their friends and family to come here.
It means the tourism sector having what they need – whether that’s investment, people or infrastructure – to deliver the great visitor experience New Zealand is well known for.
It means making sure we are using our resources productively but carefully, to ensure we protect our beautiful scenery and landscapes.
It means all regions benefitting from tourism, through more jobs and economic opportunities.
And finally, it means the tourism sector retaining the support of New Zealanders, who see the social and economic opportunities it brings to their communities. 
This is critical because the success of the tourism sector depends hugely on the goodwill of all New Zealanders. 
Addressing the challenges
To realise that vision, I think there are three big challenges that Government needs to work with the sector to address.
Attracting the right visitor mix
Firstly, we need to make sure we are attracting the right mix of visitors to give us the biggest return on our marketing investment.
To do that, we need to get the balance right between investing in established markets, newer high-growth markets, and emerging markets.   
In addition, we have to keep thinking about how we better manage our visitor flows to help smooth out seasonal peaks and troughs. 
And Tourism New Zealand has already shifted its focus to marketing the shoulder seasons to help with that.
Responding to visitor demand
Secondly, we need to continue to provide the quality experiences that our high-value visitors expect.
This includes making sure we have world-class products and services, good infrastructure, and skilled and committed people working in the sector.
It also involves managing the challenges that higher visitor numbers place on communities, services and infrastructure.
We’ve all seen the media reports on issues like driver safety, freedom camping, overcrowding of popular visitor attractions, accommodation shortages, and price rises.
But it is important we remember that these visitors bring enormous economic benefits to the regions they visit. 
All these visitors – including freedom campers - are spending money in the regions, supporting local businesses and helping create local jobs. 
In total, international visitors contribute over $900 million in GST a year. 
That sometimes gets overlooked in favour of focusing on the negative impacts of increasing numbers, or the bad behaviour of a very few.
Ensuring all regions realise their tourism potential
The third challenge facing the industry is therefore how to make sure that regions throughout New Zealand are benefiting from increased visitor numbers.
We want all regions to realise their tourism potential and reap the benefits it brings to local businesses and communities.
Government support for the sector
The Government is continuing to work with the tourism industry to achieve further success.
We are investing $115 million a year to help promote New Zealand in new and established markets.
We’ve invested nearly $60 million in the development and maintenance of the New Zealand Cycle Trail.
We’ve invested over $14 million in the Tourism Growth Partnership to help boost innovation and productivity in the tourism sector.
We’ve recently invested half a million dollars to provide tourism operators throughout New Zealand with practical information about the needs and preferences of Chinese visitors, especially the increasing numbers travelling independently.
And we have made significant improvements to our visitor visa application process enabling most travellers to apply for their visas online and, for Chinese nationals in their own language.
The Government supports the sector in many other ways – such as investing in our conservation estate – the jewel in New Zealand’s tourism crown.
In 2015 alone, the Government spent over $100 million on the Department of Conservation’s network of huts, tracks and campgrounds.
We also help fund major events which help attract high-value visitors.
Since 2013, the Government has invested $46 million in 58 events - including the FIFA under 20 World Cup, the Cricket World Cup and the World of Wearable Arts.
We also support the sector by ensuring our immigration and border services are user-friendly.
In the last Budget, we committed $33 million to boost the number of immigration officers in response to record-breaking visitor numbers.
The new Immigration ONLINE system is transforming the way visas are delivered – and Immigration New Zealand is on track to meeting their target of 80 per cent of applications being made online by 2018.
We are also supporting the sector by negotiating new air service agreements, which allow international airlines to fly here. 
Since 2012, we have negotiated or updated 50 air service agreements to help strengthen our connections with current or potential visitor markets.
And finally, we are supporting the sector through our investment in infrastructure like roading and broadband, which is essential in ensuring a high-quality visitor experience.
Budget announcement
Looking forward, the Government will continue to support the tourism sector as we recognise the economic benefits it brings to our economy.
I am pleased to announce that in Budget 2016 we are investing a further $20 million in tourism over the next four years.
That’s in addition to the more than $130 million a year we already spend.
The additional money will fund initiatives to help us attract the right visitor mix, respond to visitor demand and ensure all regions realise their tourism potential.
Budget 2016 will see an additional $8 million over four years for Tourism New Zealand to target key growth markets such as India and the United States.
With strong economic growth prospects, India’s potential as a source of visitors is high.   And the highest number of visitors from India peak in May – one of our shoulder seasons.
New air services to and from the US are bringing more flights from Los Angeles, San Francisco and Houston, and open up new opportunities for us across the eastern seaboard of the US.
The Government is also committed to ensuring all regions fully realise their tourism potential.
We recognise that some of our smaller communities are finding it hard to deal with the increase in tourist numbers.
They want to provide a great tourism experience but they need extra facilities to cope.
I am therefore pleased to announce Budget 2016 will include a new $12 million fund to help communities fund some of their smaller infrastructure needs.
One of the aims of the fund will be to help local communities manage freedom camping issues.
A working group, which will include representatives from the sector, will help set up the application process and funding criteria for these grants.
We also need to ensure the sector continues to offer a world-class visitor experience.
The New Zealand Cycle Trail, has already been extremely successful in helping attract high-value visitors, getting them to stay longer and encourage flows of visitors into the regions.
In January 2015, 125,000 people used the New Zealand Cycle Trail, compared to 97,000 in January 2014.
This is great to see.
We are keen to see even more people using the trail, and I will be making an announcement about the New Zealand Cycle Trail very soon.
Tourism Growth Partnership Fund
The Government will also continue to support the Tourism Growth Partnership programme which aims to boost innovation and lift productivity in the tourism sector
I am pleased to announce today the Government will invest in three new projects
We are investing $2.5 million in Te Puia, here in Rotorua.
This funding will go towards the development of new facilities at the New Zealand Māori Arts and Crafts Institute, including a new bone, stone and carving school, and a Maori tattoo studio. 
This project will provide visitors with access and insight into contemporary Māori culture.
Timber Trail Adventures Limited will receive just over $1.2 million dollars for the development of a lodge at the halfway point on the Timber Trail cycleway, one of New Zealand’s Great Rides.
The 80 bed Lodge will provide comfortable accommodation that will help to increase international visitors to the cycle trail.      
Finally, Queenstown Bungy will receive half a million dollars for the development of a new bungy launch system at its Nevis site.   
All these projects will, of course, be co-funded by industry.
As well as investing in the sector directly, we are helping the industry attract the money needed to fund infrastructure.
A Steering Group involving government and people from the tourism sector has been established to help accelerate investment.
The group is currently working to identify and develop a small number of opportunities to develop high-quality accommodation and to promote those opportunities to overseas investors.
As well as great experiences, products and infrastructure, the sector needs great people.
Skilled and committed people are at the centre of a great visitor experience.  And with the right staff businesses can flourish and grow.
A priority for the Government is continuing to work with the sector to help ensure you have the skilled people you need to grow your businesses.
We have been working in close partnership with TIA to deliver its People and Skills strategy, which was released last year. 
I commend TIA on their leadership in this space and look forward to seeing the results of these.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, tourism is an industry that continues to excel. 
The rapid visitor growth we’ve seen is testament to the hard work and the fantastic New Zealand experience offered to those who visit our shores.
That success has raised some challenges for us, and I am committed to continuing to work with the sector to address those.
Attracting the visitors we want, making sure the sector has what it needs to deliver a great visitor experience, and enabling all regions to benefit will mean the sector is well-placed to make an even bigger contribution in the future – benefiting all New Zealanders.
Thank you once again for having me here today.
Good morning and welcome to New Zealand’s first ever Cyber Security Summit.
It’s great to have so many business leaders from across New Zealand here in one room. 
You’re here because you’re passionate about New Zealand’s economy and about keeping it safe and secure.
So am I.
Cyber incidents and attacks threaten our economy.
They can undermine our strategic and competitive advantages and cost our economy of millions of dollars each year.
This Government takes the protection of our businesses and economy from this growing threat seriously.
Businesses, both big and small, also need to accept that cybercrime poses an enormous and immediate risk to their bottom line.
A discussion about cyber security needs to happen across business, from boardrooms to the front desk.
That’s why I’m glad to see you all here today.
Our focus on cyber security is about helping to safeguard New Zealand’s economy.
It’s about making sure we remain open for business and ensuring Kiwis are safe online.
Across Cabinet we are working hard to build a stronger, more competitive economy.
New Zealand enjoys low inflation and interest rates, and an employment rate that is the envy of the developed world.
We have low debt and high economic growth.
Under our programme of responsible economic management we have seen more jobs created and higher incomes for New Zealand families.
We are an open and confident country that backs itself on the world stage.
A big part of our economic story is our investment in connectivity.
Just like running water and electricity, connectivity has become a vital piece of infrastructure for business.
We simply cannot grow and succeed in today’s digital age without it.
It means faster, more convenient ways of communicating and delivering ideas, products and services to customers.
And it means access to a hungry and wealthy global market.
A recent report claimed that if businesses properly harnessed the internet, it could add $34 billion to the New Zealand economy.
I want all New Zealanders to tap into this enormous economic potential.
That’s why our Government is investing more than $2 billion in building faster, more reliable broadband infrastructure across the country.
Our Ultra-Fast and Rural Broadband programmes are connecting our Kiwi companies with global customers.
I’d like to acknowledge Communications Minister Amy Adams for the great work she is doing in this area.
At the end of last year, 875,000 homes, schools and workplaces were able to connect to UFB.
Across the country, the build is more than 60 per cent complete – and it’s ahead of schedule and within budget.
Our Rural Broadband Initiative is making a big difference to farmers, schools, hospitals and health centres in our regional and rural communities.
Almost 280,000 rural addresses are now able to connect to speeds that were beyond reach five years ago.
As a result of our UFB and RBI programmes, internet speeds have tripled since 2008 – and are set to more than double in speed again.
But we’re not leaving it there.
We’re extending our broadband infrastructure programmes.
And we have set a bold new target so that virtually all New Zealanders will be able to access better broadband and make the most of the digital economy.
As we encourage better use of the internet, we must also ensure we have an online environment that is as safe and secure as possible.
This is important for New Zealand’s international reputation as a safe place to do business.
Our increasing reliance on networked devices and new technology is matched by the growing problem of cyber security threats.
And while we’ve worked hard to build a productive and competitive economy, cyber-attacks can bring it to a screaming halt – or worse, bring it crashing down.
There is no point in building a brand new house to then leave the front door unlocked.
Technology also provides new opportunities for those with criminal or hostile motivations.
New Zealand’s place in the South Pacific has helped keep us safe from traditional forms of attack in the past.
But our geographical isolation does not protect us from cybercrime.   
Simply put, malicious cyber-attacks can be perpetrated from anywhere in the world, at any time and by anyone.
More than 856,000 New Zealanders are affected by cybercrime each year.
And a recent report put the cost of cybercrime to New Zealand at $257 million in 2015. 
These are small-time attacks in the form of computer viruses and malware, credit card fraud, online scams, phishing and identity theft.
And while we are yet to experience a full-scale cyber incident like we’ve seen offshore, New Zealand is not immune to them.
Overseas these have included the likes of the cyber-attack on Sony Pictures, where company information was stolen and leaked online.
Or the hacker who stole credit card details from more than 110 million customers of the US-based Target department store.
Or the cyber attackers who shut down the power grid in the Ukraine.
These are just a few examples.
If we are to take full advantage of new technology to drive economic growth, we also need to fully understand and manage the risks. 
One of the great difficulties of dealing with cyber security is the complexity of the landscape.
This is caused in part by the huge variance in the types of perpetrators attacking us, the harm they want to cause and the targets they choose to focus on.
First, the perpetrators.
In New Zealand we are dealing with state-sponsored espionage by foreign countries and organised criminal groups.
We’re attacked by extremists and terrorists, and issue-motivated activists.
Others include lone cyber hackers and disgruntled insiders.   
There are multiple kinds of threats and cyber harms.
These include targeted spam or emails aimed at fraud or theft.
Malicious software to disrupt and damage systems.
And espionage for economic or strategic advantage.
These perpetrators are aiming at a range of targets.
Victims can include anyone — from individuals or small businesses that lack the capability to address these issues, right up to large corporations. 
They target key industries and critical infrastructure.
Even government agencies aren’t safe. 
These attacks require a comprehensive and coordinated response.
And the Government has a significant role to play. 
This includes Police dealing with cybercrime, to the GCSB that are focused on advanced threats and the protection of our most important information infrastructure.
The Department of Internal Affairs is tackling spam and objectionable material, alongside the Government Chief Information Officer.
We understand it’s is not always clear where you should go if you have a cyber problem. 
There is considerable overlap – and, inevitably, there are gaps. 
Every day new threats are discovered and attackers find new ways of getting past our defences.
New Zealand has already done much to improve its cyber security.
In 2011 we launched our first ever Cyber Security Strategy.
We opened a National Cyber Security Centre to help defend government agencies and critical infrastructure providers against cyber threats.
We launched New Zealand’s first Cyber Security Awareness Week.
That programme has now evolved into the popular Connect Smart brand and services.
Last December, the Government refreshed our Cyber Security Strategy amid changes in technology and best practice.
The strategy was launched by Amy Adams with an action plan to address cybercrime.
Within that announcement was the Government’s intention to establish our own national Computer Emergency Response Team, or CERT, to defend businesses and infrastructure against cyber-attacks.
CERT will be a central part of New Zealand’s cyber security architecture.
It will be a focal point for the collection of reports about cyber security incidents and cybercrime.
This will be a significant step forward for New Zealand’s ability to understand the scope, scale and trends of this issue.
So today, I am announcing that as part of Budget 2016 the Government is committing $22.2 million to set up the national CERT.
This will be made up of $20 million of new operating funding over the next four years and $2.2 million of new capital.
This funding means the CERT will be fit for purpose and ready to open its doors in the first quarter of 2017. 
The CERT is a key part of the national cyber security infrastructure.
It will help us to better understand the active and emerging cyber threats and cybercrime landscape.
And it will play an active role in providing up-to-date and trusted information and advice to help individuals, businesses and organisations prevent cyber incidents, and to help deal with the aftermath if an incident occurs.
The CERT will be a partnership between the government, private sector and NGOs.
International evidence has shown that for CERTs to be at their most effective they need to operate seamlessly in collaboration with the public and private sectors.
Presently, many small businesses are not aware of, or don’t have the capability to deal with cyber-attacks on their business.
The CERT will assist by working with the major sectors of the economy to ensure they have relevant and targeted information and intelligence about threats, as well as expertise for dealing with them. 
This information will get to those that need it – in real-time. 
It will also be the point of contact for liaising with CERTs in other countries. 
Our $22.2 million investment from Budget 2016 underpins our commitment to cyber security.
It’s a concrete step towards better protecting New Zealand against cyber-attacks. 
But none of this will work if it’s left up to the Government alone.
As I said earlier, businesses need to accept cyber security poses an enormous and immediate threat.
It is crucial they take steps to protect the information that is vital to their day-to-day functioning and commercial success.
The reality, too, is that it is the private sector that owns and operates the communication networks and critical national infrastructure that are the lynchpins of our economy.
Government agencies don’t have a monopoly on cyber security expertise, particularly as the technology evolves rapidly and the threats are constantly morphing. 
We need to find ways to better share information and expertise between government and the private sector to address cyber security risks.
So it’s a no brainer that the government and the private sector should work together.  
Businesses are the lifeblood of our economy.
A secure internet and thriving digital economy is critical to your commercial success and our economic future.
I wish you well for the rest of the summit today.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
It’s a pleasure to be here today to discuss New Zealand’s place in the world, which is always the focus of much debate.
The debate revolves around issues like whether we should join trade agreements, welcome immigration or join international efforts to combat terrorism.
Two schools of thought stand out.
One is a very defensive position.
Put up barriers to imports and restrict investment.
Be suspicious of foreigners, especially those who don’t look or sound like us.
And they would tell those with the gumption and drive to travel across the world in search of a brighter future here that we are not that interested in having them.
Other people think New Zealand’s future is in being an open, outward-facing country, welcoming of people and ideas from other countries, and part of wide-reaching global supply chains.
They think we should be a good global citizen and promote ourselves on the world stage.
I’m firmly of the latter view.
Fortress New Zealand simply doesn’t work.
New Zealand has tried it before and it failed.
We sought shelter in tariffs and subsidies because we believed that’s what we needed to do to survive.
We tried to protect our businesses from the full force of international competition and our citizens from such evils as cheap imports.
But we didn’t get ahead. In fact, quite the opposite.
We were inefficient, insulated and inward-looking.
Then in the 1980s we were forced to forge our own path.
We went through enormous reforms, cutting subsidies, tearing down trade barriers and opening ourselves up to the world.
And we emerged as a free trade trailblazer, setting the standard in a variety of industries and helping create the prosperity we enjoy today.
The differences between then and now are stark.
Some of the wines we made then you’d struggle to sell to university students today.
Now Marlborough sauvignon and Central Otago pinot are sold and savoured around the world.
In 1975 our national sheep flock was 75 million strong.
Today, it’s less than 30 million but through investment in R and D and the incredibly hard work of our farmers  we produce as much lamb meat now as we did then.
Our farmers are world leaders because we forced ourselves to do better, build new markets and find newer, more efficient ways of doing things.
And because we forced ourselves to front up, we have gone from producing goods that could never have competed internationally to products that excel on the world stage.
We got better because we had to and we are now reaping the rewards.
The same goes for immigration.
No-one should fear people who want to come here and contribute, no matter where in the world they are from.
There’s no world-wide conspiracy to take jobs from New Zealanders or suppress wages or buy all of our houses.
Immigrants make an incredible contribution, bringing capital, skills, knowledge and experience.
They support existing businesses or start their own.
And they bring contacts, expertise and differing views and ideas which contribute to the richness of our communities.
They join the tens of thousands of Kiwis moving home because they want to live, work and raise their families in New Zealand.
We should embrace that.
They also promote New Zealand to the world – part of the reason we’ve seen a record 3.2 million tourists arrive in the past year.
The equivalent of three-quarters of our entire population travelled all the way down to the bottom of the world because they like what we have to offer.
We know how lucky we are in New Zealand and we want to share that.
And while our booming tourism industry throws up some capacity issues – yet another problem of success - we are working with the industry and local councils to get on top of those.
Since 2012 we have had an open skies air services policy which places as few restrictions as possible on airlines wanting to fly here.
As a result almost all the world’s major airlines now do so.
It also means more options and cheaper fares for New Zealanders wanting to travel the world.
And immigration supports our tourism industry by ensuring efficient and speedy visa decisions for applicants.
We have visa waiver arrangements with more than 50 countries to make it easier and more attractive for people to visit.
We also want people to invest here.
Almost $100 billion in foreign capital was invested here last year.
That creates jobs and businesses and provides funding to get infrastructure projects off the ground.
The new $200 million Park Hyatt in Auckland and the $35 million Sofitel in Wellington will create jobs during construction and when the hotels are up and running.
They also add to our tourism infrastructure.
Christchurch has been chosen as a location for one of only seven international “xones” established by Vodafone.
These are purpose built spaces to support startups and encourage innovation.
And the Queenstown Resort College is educating young New Zealanders in Otago and Northland.
These are just a few examples.
New Zealand has benefited immensely from investment which has come from all around the world.
Those investors see our growing economy, booming tourism, strong migration and a large pipeline of construction projects which will continue to stimulate growth.
They see our strong track record and growth forecasts of around 3 per cent on average over the next few years.
Ultimately these investors chose New Zealand because they see opportunity here.
They believe in our future.
So do I.
This Government knows we can compete and we will succeed.
Because history has shown we can.
No one owes us a living, we must earn it.
Trade, investment, migration – they make New Zealand a better place.
That’s why agreements like TPP are so important – and why New Zealand pushed so hard for it.
I want to spend some time today talking about the TPP and how it fits into the Government’s wider programme of building ties across Asia and the Pacific.
The farmers, growers and manufacturers of 1960s New Zealand could never have imagined the opportunities we are creating today.
We are exceptionally well-placed to take advantage of those and I want to lead a country that does exactly that - an open and confident country that backs itself on the world stage.
As I’ve said many times, we won’t get rich selling things to 4.5 million New Zealanders.
But we could by selling to 4.5 billion people overseas.
That’s why we support strong international connections.
And why we focus so strongly on making it as easy as possible for our businesses to succeed through good public policy.
We understand the benefits that free trade agreements deliver and the opportunities they offer.
I back our farmers, our manufacturers, our ICT companies and in fact all our export industries to succeed.
If we can get an equal crack at world markets, we’re up there with the best in the world.
That opportunity is what free trade is about for New Zealand.
And the TPP is our most significant free trade deal to date.
It will open up access to 800 million people around the world.
On current trade volumes, tariff savings will reach $274 million a year once TPP is fully implemented.
It will give our exporters an equal opportunity to sell their goods and services in markets including the world’s first and third largest – the US and Japan.
We often talk about the overall benefits to New Zealand, but this deal matters to individual businesses and workers in every region of the country.
The orchardist in Hawkes Bay, the winegrower in Marlborough, the dairy farmer in Waikato and the IT provider in Auckland all stand to benefit.
Removing those tariffs and non-tariff barriers will make it easier for them to compete.
In total, the deal is forecast to add at least $2.7 billion a year to New Zealand’s GDP by 2030.
And as we saw from our FTA with China, these agreements have a tendency to exceed our expectations.
Since we became the first developed country to sign an FTA with China in 2008 our exports to that country have almost tripled.
It is now our first or second-largest trading partner, depending on what you count and when you count it.
Trade with China is now worth more than $20 billion a year and our goal is $30 billion by 2030.
Opposition to TPP tends to flare up then fall away again pretty quickly because nothing much of substance is ever raised.
And most of what is in TPP is also in our existing China and Korea FTAs, neither of which has killed off democracy, wrecked the environment, led to wholesale obesity, or whatever the current anti-TPP message is.
Trade agreements are always a matter of give and take.
But New Zealand is already an open, transparent and trade-friendly country, which means only a fraction of TPP’s obligations will require us to change what we already do now.
The only significant cost comes from extending New Zealand’s copyright period from 50 to 70 years.
This cost – in terms of foregone savings on books, films, music and other works – increases gradually over more than 20 years and averages around $55 million a year over the very long term.
Some people think that cost is overstated.
As you probably all know, other potentially far-reaching proposals to do with PHARMAC and intellectual property that were raised earlier in the negotiations were not included in the final deal.
We will continue to honour the Crown’s Treaty of Waitangi obligations.
Parliament remains sovereign and we will continue to legislate in the best interest of New Zealanders. No one dictates to New Zealand.
The next step is to introduce the TPP legislation to Parliament next week.
This follows a series of meetings around the country to better inform the public, as well as the release of the TPP text and the opportunity for the public to submit on it.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement Amendment Bill will make the legislative changes needed to ratify TPP.
This includes applying preferential tariff rates, intellectual property obligations, and increasing the investment screening thresholds for significant business assets.
After introduction the TPP Bill will go through the standard parliamentary process, including further opportunities for public submissions to the Select Committee.
These amendments will only come into effect once TPP enters into force for New Zealand, which could be late 2017 or early in 2018.
And we won’t stop with the TPP.
We also hope to upgrade our existing FTA with China and we’re in negotiations with the EU and the Gulf States as well as with the other nations involved in the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership talks.
It’s worth reminding ourselves that 99.9 per cent of our potential customers live overseas – many in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region.
Through the TPP, ASEAN and our bilateral agreements New Zealand is incredibly well placed to take advantage of the opportunities opening up there.
Once TPP is in place our trade agreements will cover almost the entire Pacific Rim – a region of incredible potential.
The Asia-Pacific will be the major driver of global economic growth for the foreseeable future.
It’s part of the reason why President Obama is so focused on getting TPP over the line in the US – which we remain optimistic he will be able to do.
For the US the TPP is about taking advantage of economic growth as well as maintaining leadership in the region.
Everyone wants the US there, but if they’re not the region won’t stand still – others will look to fill the vacuum.
In my opinion, though, US leadership remains strong and it remains in its best interest to join TPP.
The sheer weight of population and the growing middle class in China and other rapidly developing countries is driving innovation and change at rates we’ve not seen before.
That’s good for our region and for the world.
New Zealand will be part of that if we keep our outward, open focus.
That will help us continue to drive economic growth for the benefit of all New Zealanders.
Building a first-class economy will mean a first-class health system, education for our young people and modern infrastructure.
Actually I think most New Zealanders are on the side of openness – we are a nation of travellers, curious about the world and driven to see more of it.
New Zealand has become more multi-cultural, more global and more diverse and we are much better for it.
And just because we promote ourselves and we are welcoming does not mean we have no safeguards or restrictions.
Take the Overseas Investment Office process.
Foreign buyers of sensitive land must go through a rigorous application process and prove they offer greater benefits to New Zealand than would be obtained through a domestic sale.
And for a foreigner to come here they must show they have the skills or the capital or the right attitude to make a difference.
I believe we have the right balance between encouraging investment and ensuring that investment benefits New Zealand.
We work so hard to build people, diplomatic and security ties with the world.
A lot of you will have been a part of that effort across your working lives.
You’ve helped to build the reputation we have today as a solid, considered and consistent international voice.
We might be 4.5 million people at the bottom of the world but we punch above our weight on the international stage.
You don’t get onto the UN Security Council on the first ballot if you are not held in high regard by your peers.
Or have a former Prime Minister with a shot at being the next UN Secretary General.
Not only is Helen Clark hugely talented and qualified, she stands on a platform burnished by New Zealand’s role and reputation on the international stage.
It’s why being a New Zealander is such a major part of her pitch.
And we know – and much of the world does too - that she would do an incredible job and it’s why we will do everything we can to help her get there.
We work hard to build our international connections.
We have 56 MFAT posts around the world and diplomatic relations with 132 countries – more than two-thirds of all those represented at the UN – in order to promote our national interests.
NZTE covers all 192 countries we have a trading relationship with, creating new links and opportunities for our businesses.
And I have travelled to 45 countries as Prime Minister to strengthen our relationships, forge new ties and open doors for New Zealand.
It’s also why we are members of Five Eyes and we are playing our part in the international efforts to degrade and destroy ISIL.
We send peacekeepers around the world.
We currently have Defence Force personnel deployed on 14 operations across 10 countries
We are obliged to pull our weight.
And it’s not the New Zealand way to shirk our responsibilities or shrink from a challenge.
The risks facing the world are many – economic, conflict and terror-related – and they are too great for any one country to face alone.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
New Zealand has carved out an enviable reputation on the world stage.
We have done that through being consistent, fair, principled and ambitious for ourselves and the world.
We have led the way on free trade, played our role as peacemaker and stood alongside our allies in conflict zones.
We continue to use our seat on the UN Security Council to provide a considered and consistent voice on issues ranging from terror to refugee crises and climate change.
And to give a voice to small countries such as our Pacific neighbours where they have otherwise struggled.
Under this Government we will continue to promote ourselves and to build our international connections.
Our vision for New Zealand is a more open, more confident, more integrated and more prosperous country that plays its part on the international stage.
We will continue to look for opportunities that benefit all New Zealanders and we will remain the honest broker.
It’s important that we grasp those opportunities, whether they’re on our backdoor step in Asia and the Pacific or further afield.
The job is far from finished. In many ways, it’s just beginning.
My Government is motivated to continue working hard to ensure we become the more prosperous and ambitious nation I envisaged when I became Prime Minister.
If we do that, I know we can deliver the opportunities New Zealanders deserve.
Thank you.
It’s good to be back here for my annual pre-Budget speech and I want to thank Business New Zealand for hosting me once again.
This year’s Budget will be delivered against a backdrop of a growing economy, supported by strong levels of tourism and migration, a large pipeline of construction projects and low interest rates.
Notwithstanding challenges in the dairy industry, most New Zealand forecasters are predicting growth of around 3 per cent on average over the next few years.
That’s a good position for the country to be in.
In fact, over the last five years New Zealand has had one of the fastest growth rates in the OECD.
However, nothing is guaranteed.
There are always risks, and at the moment these revolve around issues like the ability of China to smoothly negotiate its economic challenges.
On the other hand, the economy could do better than forecast.
That’s why the Government takes a medium-term approach to fiscal policy, looking through ups and downs and focusing on the overall path of the Crown’s finances.
That path shows increasing surpluses and government debt falling below 20 per cent of GDP, in line with the Government’s objectives.
Every year at this event I try to talk about an aspect of the Budget that’s relevant for Kiwi businesses and I’m going to do so again today.
Last year you might recall I announced an increase in Callaghan Innovation’s co-funding budget.
Our efforts to raise business innovation are paying dividends, with a Statistics NZ survey last week reporting a 15 per cent lift in business R&D activity in just one year.
Today I’m going to announce some tax changes that will be positive for businesses, and especially for smaller businesses.
But before that I want to run through some of our other activities in the business space.
The first point I want to make is that government is a big business in its own right.
We own and operate hospitals and schools, for example, provide law enforcement and defence services, and run transport, electricity and housing businesses.
Excluding transfers, we are a quarter of the economy.
Our biggest contribution to New Zealand’s productivity is in running our 25 per cent better.
And by keeping our spending in check we reduce some of the burden on taxpayers and provide more space for the internationally competitive sectors of the economy to grow.
So the Government is continuing to get its own house in order – making sure we are good providers of services and good owners of assets.
In our welfare and social housing reforms, for example, we are promoting more competition, using more commercial tools like actuarial valuations, and focusing on getting our customers back to independence.
A private sector business needs to understand its customers because they drive its revenue.
We need to understand our customers because they drive our costs.
We are digging into these costs and the information is leading to important changes in the public sector.
Alongside other programmes, this approach is helping to reduce government spending as a proportion of GDP, as well as getting better results for New Zealanders.
The Treasury has calculated that in structural terms – so not including cyclical factors like whether the economy is in a boom or a recession – government spending increased by eight percentage points of GDP between 2004 and 2009.
That increase was simply unaffordable and would have seen a blowout in government debt.
In response, our approach has been to reduce Budget operating allowances, make efficiency savings across the public sector, and shift the focus of government agencies onto working together to achieve results under an assumption of limited new funding.
As a result, we have reversed most of that increase in spending from the mid-2000s and got the operating balance back into surplus.
So an important role for the Government in supporting business activity is to keep its own house in order.
Another is to provide an environment where businesses can be flexible and resilient.
The business growth agenda is the master list of hundreds of government initiatives in this area.
Let me mention just a few.
New Zealand’s future is in being an open, outward-facing country, welcoming of people and ideas from other countries, and part of wide-reaching global supply chains.
It’s worth reminding ourselves that 99.9 per cent of the potential customers for our products live overseas.
Many of these are in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region that surrounds us.
That’s why the TPP agreement is so important – it puts a crucial piece into the jigsaw.
When TPP comes into force, New Zealand will have free trade relationships with China, Hong Kong, Chinese Taipei, Japan, Korea, the ten ASEAN countries, Australia, Chile, Peru, Mexico, the United States and Canada.
That’s pretty much the entire Pacific Rim.
In particular, our TPP partners the United States and Japan are the biggest and third-biggest economies in the world.
A quarter of all household consumption in the world happens in America.
So we need to be in TPP – it keeps us connected to the world.
So too does ultra-fast broadband.
It makes the world smaller for New Zealand businesses, helps their productivity and makes them more competitive.
Our ultra-fast broadband programme has businesses as one of its top priorities, alongside schools and hospitals.
Our goal was to have 90 per cent of businesses in UFB coverage areas able to connect to faster, more reliable broadband by the end of 2015.
We exceeded that target.
In fact, 97 per cent of businesses in these areas – more than 200,000 firms – can now connect to UFB.
Technology is changing the way New Zealand firms do business.
It should also change the way they interact with the Government.
One of the Government’s 10 key result areas, alongside things like reducing welfare dependency and increasing educational attainment, is to ensure that New Zealanders can complete their transactions with the Government easily in a digital environment.
Two areas we are focusing on are ACC and tax.
Both are going through big transformation programmes.
Improvements to ACC have also led to significant levy reductions.
In total, employers, workers and motor vehicle owners are now paying $2 billion a year less in levies than they were five years ago – the equivalent of a sizeable tax cut.
In 2011/12, employers paid $1.47 in work account levies for every $100 of their payroll. Now they pay 80 cents.
Back then, the average ACC levy per motor vehicle was $335. Now it’s only $130 – a reduction of over 60 per cent.
ACC also launched a five-year transformation project, with a focus on improving the service it provides to business customers.
The programme includes digital services that will provide businesses with real-time information on injury rates and trends in their workplaces, and support them to develop more effective injury prevention initiatives.
Technology is also affecting the way businesses interact with Inland Revenue.
Around 30 to 40 per cent of businesses currently use cloud-based accounting software but this is expected to grow to 85 to 90 per cent in the next 10 years.
We want the tax system to fit in with how businesses operate, not the other way around.
That’s the idea behind Inland Revenue’s business transformation project.
The intention is for businesses to see information and interact with Inland Revenue through an on-line account.
Compliance costs will be reduced by using a business’s normal processes and systems – especially accounting systems – to meet tax obligations.
This will make it easier for businesses to get things right and harder to get things wrong, allowing them to focus on running their businesses with tax as a secondary consideration.
The move to a new information system provides an opportunity to revisit New Zealand’s business tax rules.
We have grasped that opportunity.
So what I want to announce today is a new SME-friendly tax package that I think will be welcomed by all businesses, and especially by smaller ones.
The package will make paying tax easier and more certain, reduce the burden of interest and penalties, and help smaller businesses tailor payments to their own circumstances.
I think everyone acknowledges that meeting tax obligations is a particular challenge for smaller businesses.
Among other things, businesses tell us that provisional tax is hard to get right and expensive to get wrong.
Perfect accuracy can sometimes be costly in a way that doesn’t seem justified.
And some penalties are seen as punitive and discourage compliance.
So we have developed this tax package to make it easier for smaller businesses, in particular, to comply with their tax obligations and therefore reduce costs and distractions.
There are three main parts to this package.
The first relates to provisional tax.
Among other things, we are going to eliminate or reduce use-of-money interest for the vast majority of taxpayers.
And we are going to give small businesses – those with a turnover of less than $5 million – the opportunity to choose a new “pay-as-you-go” option for provisional tax.
The way provisional tax currently works is that people, by one method or another, estimate their likely tax bill for the coming year and pay that amount in three  instalments.
This new option drops the estimation part and instead works out your tax payments on an ongoing basis throughout the year.
Every two months your accounting software will calculate your taxable income for that period.
You’ll be prompted to make the right tax payment directly through your accounting system, and generally at the same time as you pay GST.
Under this new “accounting income method”, provisional tax payments will more accurately match income as it is earned, be made more regularly and be integrated into normal business practices.
Use-of-money interest won’t apply to taxpayers who choose this method and who pay their tax on time.
Up to 110,000 small businesses could be eligible to use the accounting income method, starting from 1 April 2018 when Inland Revenue’s new computer system is up and running.
I welcome this initiative because it means small business owners and managers can get on with running their businesses rather than being tied up in tax compliance.
That’s what we want and what businesses want, so it’s a win-win.
I mentioned use-of-money interest a moment ago.
This, as you know, is paid, or received, on the difference between a business’s actual tax liability for the year and what they paid in provisional tax.
This is only known at the end of the year.
We want to get a lot more businesses out of the use-of-money regime because interest charges are often burdensome and frustrating for taxpayers who are simply following the rules.
The accounting income method will help do that for many small businesses.
In addition, taxpayers who continue to use what is currently the most common method for calculating provisional tax – the standard or “uplift” method – won’t be subject to use-of-money interest if their tax liability for the year is under $60,000 and their tax is paid on time.
That includes companies, as well as individuals, and will take up to 67,000 taxpayers out of the use-of-money interest regime altogether.
For taxpayers with a tax liability above $60,000, and again who use the uplift method, use-of-money interest will only apply from the third and last instalment of provisional tax.
This change potentially benefits a further 19,000 taxpayers.
It will also give bigger taxpayers the chance to do a “square up” in their last instalment, since by then they’ll have a good idea of their actual tax position for the year.
In that case, they will have paid the right amount of provisional tax so won’t be subject to interest.
The combination of all these changes means that the vast majority of taxpayers either won’t pay use-of-money interest or will pay significantly less than they do now.
That’s the first part of the package – provisional tax.
The second part of the SME-friendly tax package I’m announcing today gives more flexibility for contractors to choose a withholding rate that suits their individual circumstances.
Payments to around 130,000 contractors each year have withholding tax deducted from them.
Many of you will have seen the form that says if you are a shearer you’ll have payments withheld at 15 per cent, if you’re a freelance journalist they’re withheld at 25 per cent, cleaning contractors at 20 per cent, and so on down the list.
You may well have scratched your head at these differences.
We are going to make the system more flexible.
From 1 April 2017, it will be easy for contractors to choose their own withholding rate, subject only to a minimum of 10 per cent.
This means contractors can take into account their individual circumstances, which of course they know better than anyone else.
If an accurate rate is chosen, contractors may no longer be forced into an “over-withholding” situation or an “under-withholding” situation that could see them liable for provisional tax.
It’s in their interest to get it right.
Contractors who aren’t currently subject to withholding tax rules will also be able to elect into this system, with the payer’s agreement.
And withholding tax rules will be extended to contractors engaged through labour hire firms.
The third part of the business tax package is about late payment penalties.
For new debts after 1 April 2017, the 1 per cent ongoing monthly penalty will be scrapped for income tax, GST and some other payments.
The immediate penalty that applies to late payments, and the 4 per cent penalty after a further week, will remain.
So will use-of-money interest on overdue tax.
But a 1 per cent monthly penalty on top of all this, as we have at the moment, makes the combination of penalties and interest very burdensome.
We need to be realistic.
Building up a very large debt to Inland Revenue is often an ineffective way to get individuals and businesses to resolve their tax situation.
And a large portion of penalties is uncollectable and is simply written off.
The Government encourages compliance and wants to give taxpayers more opportunity to talk to Inland Revenue and work out a way to repay their tax debts before they become too big to resolve.
So these are the new measures we’re introducing for provisional tax, withholding tax and penalties.
There are a few more parts to the package but those I’ve talked about today are the main ones.
Inland Revenue is releasing an issues paper today that goes through everything in the package in great detail, as you’d expect.
Your feedback is welcome.
The whole package will cost $187 million over four years and comes out of the new spending allowance for this year’s Budget.
Some of the more complex measures will be implemented through Inland Revenue’s new IT system in 2018, but most of the changes will begin on 1 April next year.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
This is just one of the many measures you will see in the Budget on May 26.
That Budget will continue the National-led Government’s track record of responsible fiscal management.
It will contain initiatives to help build a more productive and competitive economy and to deliver better public services.
And it will show how the Government is continuing to support the rebuild of Christchurch.
Forecasts will show a growing economy, rising employment and higher wages.
New Zealand is in good shape.
The Government has a busy programme ahead of it.
Providing we stick with that programme, I’m confident we can deliver the opportunities and security New Zealanders and their families deserve.
Thank you.
Honourable Members.
The Government is continuing to implement its plan to build a faster-growing economy with more jobs and rising incomes, and to support New Zealanders and their families.
Over the next year, we have a comprehensive policy agenda, and a substantial legislative programme to put before the House.
Our policy agenda and legislative programme will reflect the Government’s four priorities:
to responsibly manage the Government’s finances
to build a more competitive and productive economy
to deliver better public services to New Zealanders, and
to support the rebuilding of Christchurch.
This year we look forward to continuing strong and effective relationships with our confidence and supply partners – ACT, United Future and the Maori Party.
The agreements we have with these parties, and the goodwill and respect that exists between us, enable the Government to operate in an effective, stable and inclusive manner.
Honourable Members.
The New Zealand economy continues to expand.The latest Treasury forecasts show economic growth averaging around 2.7 per cent a year over the next five years.
On average, people’s incomes are growing faster than inflation, and the forecasts show continued employment growth. Operating surpluses are expected to grow, and net debt to peak in 2017 as a proportion of GDP before beginning to fall.
However, weaker dairy prices, along with other factors, are contributing to slower growth in the nominal economy, which is expected to be around $17 billion lower over the next five years than was expected in last year’s Budget.This flows through to slightly less tax revenue, slightly lower operating balances and slightly higher debt, compared to Budget forecasts.
None of these forecast revisions change the Government’s overall fiscal strategy, which is to keep a tight rein on spending, focus on results from public services, start to pay down debt and look to return any excess revenue on top of this to taxpayers.
The Budget later this year will set out the Government’s revenue and spending intentions.
The operating allowance remains at $1 billion for Budget 2016, $2.5 billion for Budget 2017 and $1.5 billion for both Budget 2018 and Budget 2019, although some re-phasing of these allowances between Budgets is possible.
The Future Investment Fund has now been fully allocated and the capital allowance for Budget 2016 has therefore been increased by $1 billion.
This year the Government will progress legislation to apply GST to cross-border services and intangibles supplied by offshore suppliers, introduce a withholding tax on certain sales of residential property by people living overseas, and remove some of the legislative obstacles to making tax administration simpler and more certain.
The Government will continue to support the implementation of Inland Revenue’s long-term Business Transformation programme to modernise and simplify New Zealand’s tax system. It will also continue to work with other OECD countries on addressing international base erosion and profit shifting.
This year,ACC levies will drop by a total of $450 million and the Government will also confirm the funding policy for future levies.
From 1 April, the average work levy paid by businesses will reduce by 11 per cent to 80 cents per $100 of liable earnings, and the earners’ levy, paid by everyone in the paid workforce, will decrease by 4 per cent to $1.21 per $100 of liable earnings.
From 1 July, the average motor vehicle levy will drop by a third, to around $130 per vehicle. Honourable Members.
The Business Growth Agenda is the Government’s programme of work to build a more productive, confident and competitive economy that will deliver higher incomes and higher living standards for New Zealanders.
The BGA is focused on six key inputs for businesses: skills, exports, infrastructure, innovation, natural resources and investment. It also captures three important cross-cutting themes – Maori economic development, sectors and regions, and regulation.
The Government will continue this year to support and add to this programme.
This includes a Regional Growth Programme, working with local communities to identify economic growth opportunities in five regions – Northland, Bay of Plenty, East Coast, Manawatu-Whanganui and the West Coast. It also includes implementing the Investment Attraction Strategy to get more high- quality foreign business investment in New Zealand.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement is today being presented to this House for examination, together with a National Interest Analysis.TPP offers much better access to large and important markets for New Zealand’s goods and services, and New Zealand has had to make relatively few concessions in return.A free trade agreement including the United States and Japan – the first- and third-largest economies in the world – has been sought over many years by successive New Zealand governments.
Legislation will later be introduced to implement those parts of TPP that require a law change. Full public consultation will occur during these stages.
The Government will also continue to progress a number of other high-quality trade agreements, including a potential agreement with the EU and an upgrade of New Zealand’s FTA with China.
The Government will continue to work with and support the tourism industry, building on a 38 per cent growth in international visitor expenditure in the last year.This includes efforts to drive visitor numbers in the shoulder seasons, prioritise emerging markets, and increase special interest, business events and premium travel.
Legislation will be introduced this year to enable New Zealand’s border services to respond and adapt effectively to new technologies, business practices and security risks.The Government will also consider options to streamline the collection of duty on low-value physical imports.
The Government and primary industry organisations will continue to share resources and work together to manage and respond to the most important biosecurity risks.
The Government will this year progress legislation to reform the Resource Management Act, to reduce costs and delays for homeowners and businesses, and to improve New Zealand’s planning and environmental controls.Among other things, the bill aims to achieve stronger national direction to improve consistency, simpler and quicker consenting, more affordable housing and improved environmental management.
Legislation will also be introduced to create an ocean sanctuary in the Kermadec region.At 620,000 square kilometres, this would be one of the world’s largest fully-protected areas.
The Government will consult publicly on a review of the Fisheries Management System, on improving the responsible use, management and conservation of New Zealand’s ocean environment, and on regulations to be issued under the recently amended Animal Welfare Act.
The Government will respond to a review of competition in the dairy sector and will partner with industry in new R&D programmes through the $720 million Primary Growth Partnership.
The Government will this year continue to encourage petroleum and mineral exploration while adhering to strong environmental and safety provisions. Projects such as aeromagnetic surveys and petroleum basin analysis will continue and, by 2017, data will be available on around 30 per cent of New Zealand’s land surface.
The Government will also continue to promote competition in the electricity market, for the benefit of consumers and to keep downward pressure on power prices. There are now around 30 electricity retail brands operating in New Zealand – the highest number on record.
The Government will continue to promote New Zealand’s renewable energy advantage. Renewable electricity made up 80 per cent of total generation in 2014 and the Government has a target of reaching 90 per cent by 2025.
Following the Paris Agreement on climate change, the Government will this year complete its review of the Emissions Trading Scheme, which will assess the Scheme’s operation and effectiveness to 2020 and beyond. Public submissions have been invited.
The Government will continue to partner with communities and businesses to protect our natural environment and native wildlife.
Honourable Members.
The Government will this year maintain and advance its programme of investment in modern infrastructure. In the coming financial year, the Government expects to spend a net $6 billion on capital investments, including state highways, schools and hospitals.
The Government will continue construction of the five remaining roads Roads of National Significance, and make progress on accelerated roading projects in Auckland and across the regions.
Significant investment will be made in urban cycleways, and the Government will consider measures to support and encourage the uptake of electric vehicles in New Zealand.
The Government will this year complete its review of the regulatory framework for small passenger services, to ensure regulations in this area are fit for purpose and accommodate new technologies. The Government will also respond to the review of the driver licensing system, and look to progress initiatives to reduce the risks of alcohol- and drug-related impairment in all transport activities.
The Government will help to complete the investigation and development of new regional-scale irrigation proposals, to help provide a reliable water supply.
The Government will this year extend its Ultra-Fast Broadband and Rural Broadband Initiatives, which together involve investment of over $2 billion in faster connectivity.The extension of UFB means it will eventually be available to 80 per cent of New Zealanders.
The Government will this year work to increase the supply of housing in Auckland by making underutilised and vacant Crown land available for residential development. In addition, over the next 10 years, the Government will support private sector development in Auckland of a further 3,000 homes at Hobsonville and at least 7,500 homes in Tamaki.
Legislation will be progressed to require insulation and smoke alarms in all rental properties and to increase enforcement of housing standards, without imposing unreasonable costs.
The Government will continue to strengthen the tertiary education system, including progressing legislation to improve administrative and governance arrangements for educational entities and funding bodies.
Three new ICT Graduate Schools – in Auckland,Wellington and Christchurch – will be funded, and the number of places in Trades Academies will increase.
The Government will also progress legislation to allow information on student loan borrowers to be shared between New Zealand and Australian tax authorities.
Legislation will be progressed to strengthen minimum employment standards and address zero hour contracts. Paid parental leave will be extended to 18 weeks from 1 April, following an increase from 14 to 16 weeks last year.
In April, new health and safety laws will take effect as the Government continues its push to lower New Zealand’s workplace death and injury rates by at least 25 per cent by 2020.
The Government will this year respond to recommendations from the Pay Equity Working Group, and will progress legislation to enable communities to decide – through local councils – whether to allow shop trading on Easter Sunday.
The Government will continue to ensure New Zealand’s immigration policies support economic growth while effectively managing risk at the border.A new Global Impact Visa will be developed to attract the likes of young technology entrepreneurs with global links.
The Government will review the refugee quota programme and complete the rebuild of the Mangere Refugee Resettlement Centre.The Government is also this year welcoming the first tranches of 600 Syrian refugees, on top of the normal annual intake of 750 refugees.
Honourable Members.
The Government will continue to support an increase in business-led research and development towards 1 per cent of GDP.This will include pursuing opportunities to increase R&D investment by multinational companies in New Zealand.
The Government will progress the establishment of Regional Research Institutes, which will accelerate regional economic competitiveness through commercially-focused research. It will also identify opportunities to develop Callaghan Innovation’s existing grant programmes to support business innovation.
The Government will progress legislation to strengthen New Zealand’s anti-cartel regime and will ensure consumers and businesses are well served through reviews of sections of the Commerce Act, the Financial Advisors Act and the Financial Service Providers Act. Feedback has been sought on a proposed bill to modernise the legislative framework for incorporated societies.The Government will also complete a review of Overseas Investment Office fees.
A bill will be introduced to remove 120 pieces of superfluous legislation, and parts of eight other acts. This would reduce the total number of public acts in force by more than 10 per cent.
Honourable Members.
The Government will continue to take a social investment approach to public services and ensure that departments and other agencies are focused squarely on getting better results for New Zealanders.
Over the longer term, what is good for communities through better services is also good for the Government’s books through more effective spending.
As part of this approach, the Government has set 10 challenging results for the public service to achieve, including reducing crime, long-term welfare dependency and educational underachievement. Agencies will continue to work to achieve these targets.
The Government will continue to apply rigorous and evidence-based investment practices to social services.This will include exploring the safe collection and sharing of government and business data through the Data Futures Partnership, and growing the use of data in decision making through initiatives like Statistics New Zealand’s Integrated Data Infrastructure.
The Government is committed to supporting families and children, and to helping more people get off a benefit and into work.
On 1 April this year, benefits for families with children will increase by $25 a week on top of the usual inflation adjustment – the first time benefits have increase in real terms since 1972.At the same time, low-income working families earning $36,350 a year or less, before tax, will get $12.50 extra a week from Working for Families, and some very low-income families will get $24.50 extra.
Most sole parents, and partners of beneficiaries, will have to be available for part-time work once their youngest child turns three, rather than five as now.All beneficiaries with part-time work obligations will be expected to find work for 20 hours a week, rather than 15 hours a week as now.
Childcare subsidies for pre-schoolers and the OSCAR subsidy for out-of-school and school holiday programmes will also increase for lower-income families from 1 April.
The Government will this year progress legislation to provide better support to 19-year-old parents and other unemployed 18- and 19-year-olds at risk of long term welfare dependence. Legislation will be introduced to rewrite the Social Security Act to reflect a modern, work-focused welfare system and to ensure the law is clear and fit for purpose.
Ongoing investment will be made in Whanau Ora.
The Child,Youth and Family Expert Advisory Panel will complete its work this year and the Government will respond to its report.The Government will also continue to roll out Children’s Teams across the country, with the tenth team in Counties-Manukau scheduled to be launched early this year.
Legislation will be progressed to establish a register of child sex offenders, to allow Police and Corrections to assess, monitor and manage risks to public safety.
The Government will continue to improve access to hospital services, including by funding an increase in elective surgical operations.With this year’s increase, the annual volume of elective surgery will have risen by 50,000, or 42 per cent, since 2008.The number of hospital specialist assessments has also risen from 432,000 a year to 542,000 a year, and remains a government priority.
The Government will continue to emphasise prevention and early intervention, supported by the development of a new Health Strategy. Initiatives include the B4 School Check – where a new health target has been created around childhood obesity – and the rheumatic fever prevention programme, which treats sore throats before they develop into rheumatic fever. Immunising children also remains a priority.
This year, Local Mobility Action Teams will begin to deliver early, community-based interventions for osteoarthritis patients, including physiotherapy, exercise programmes and pain management.
Hospital redevelopments will continue in Christchurch, Dunedin and on the West Coast. New facilities at Burwood Hospital are expected to be completed shortly and the new Acute Services building at Christchurch Hospital is scheduled to open in 2018.
The Government will continue to implement the Investing in Educational Success initiative this year, with more schools across the country expected to form communities of learning.This initiative will help to keep the best teachers in the classroom, and establish new teaching and leadership roles.
The Government will continue to drive better educational achievement among New Zealand’s most vulnerable populations, including increasing the number of Maori and Pacifica leaving school with qualifications. Further work on a review of the school funding system will be carried out, to ensure that the students who need the most assistance receive it.
The Partnership School Kura Hourua initiative will be progressed this year, with new schools to be established in 2016 for opening in 2017. Legislation will also be introduced to modernise the framework for education delivery in New Zealand.
The Government will continue to work on the Special Education Update, to ensure that the system is child-centred, simple to access, and available for as long as required.
Significant investment will be made this year in new schools and classrooms, and all eligible schools will be connected to N4L’s Managed Network by the end of the year.
The Government is reforming social housing to grow supply and get better outcomes for people and families most in need of housing assistance.
Starting this year, community housing providers will deliver over 500 new social housing places in Auckland, through long-term contracts with the Ministry of Social Development.A request for proposal for a further 1,000 places is now open for responses.
In March this year, 2,800 Housing New Zealand homes will be transferred to the Tamaki Redevelopment Company.This will result in at least 7,500 new homes in that area over the next 10 to 15 years, of which more than a third will be for social housing.The transfer of Housing New Zealand properties to community housing providers in Invercargill and Tauranga will happen later this year.
Over the next three years, tenancy reviews – especially amongst those paying market rent – is expected to free up over 1,000 social housing places for those with greater housing needs.
The Government will maintain its strong focus on law and order, and on crime prevention. Separate pieces of legislation will be introduced to strengthen the Domestic Violence Act, following the 2015 review, and to act on recommendations from the Philip Smith/Traynor inquiry.
A Police-led, multi-agency Gang Intelligence Centre will be established to tackle and prevent gang crime and reduce the harm it causes to families and communities.
The Government will continue to roll out working prisons across New Zealand to provide offenders with transferable skills to support them in the community when they are released.Additional funding will go towards developing and delivering a drug and alcohol post-release programme.
The Government will progress legislation to modernise the rules governing the court system, including greater use of electronic technology.The Government will also progress reform of the Trust Act and progress legislation to tighten up on drug and alcohol testing of community-based offenders, and on electronic monitoring.
Honourable Members.
The Government will introduce legislation this year to reform Te Ture Whenua Maori Act, to help unlock the economic potential of Maori land.The Government will also continue to resolve historical Treaty of Waitangi claims, and intends for all willing and able iwi to have settled by 2017.
A second referendum on the New Zealand flag will be held in March this year.This will be a binding referendum that allows voters to choose between the current flag and the alternative design chosen late last year.
New Zealand will enter its second year as a member of the United Nations Security Council.We will continue our efforts to support the resolution of conflicts in Syria, the Middle East and elsewhere, and to encourage the Council to be more active in preventing the emergence of new conflicts.
The Government is committed to a strong security and intelligence community to protect the safety and security of New Zealanders.This year the Government will respond to the independent review of the intelligence and security agencies and their governing legislation.
New Zealand is not immune to the threat posed by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.The Government’s response to ISIL will continue to span humanitarian assistance, diplomatic efforts through the United Nations, working with like-minded states, and through our Defence Force training mission in Iraq.
This year the Government intends to release a Defence White Paper.The White Paper will be the blueprint for how the Government addresses the security threats, challenges and opportunities facing New Zealand over the next 25 years.
A review of the non-combat training mission in Iraq will be completed.
A bill will be introduced this year to modernise the mandate of New Zealand’s fire services and bring volunteer, career, urban and rural firefighters together in one, integrated, new national fire service.
The Government will also progress the Civil Defence Emergency Management Amendment Bill to enable communities to better recover from small to moderate scale emergencies.
Honourable Members.
This year’s Budget will commit the last major tranche of funding to support the rebuilding of Christchurch after the destructive earthquakes in 2010 and 2011, as we move from recovery to regeneration.
The Government’s contribution to the rebuild is very significant, totalling around $17 billion, including payments made by the Earthquake Commission, net of reinsurance proceeds.
The focus is now on regenerating the economic and social life of the city as key projects are completed and the new Christchurch takes shape.
This year will see a transition to greater local control as the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority is wound up. CERA’s functions have been passed to other government departments, and the Government has established two new organisations in its place.
A new Crown company, Otakaro Ltd, has been established to oversee the development of the central city anchor projects.Another organisation, Regenerate Christchurch, will provide strong local leadership. It will have the ability to propose planning changes and oversee the long-term development of the central city, residential red zone and New Brighton.
This year will see further progress made on the central city anchor projects, the Convention Centre, the Metro Sports Facility and residential developments in the East Frame.
The Justice and Emergency Services Precinct will be completed this year, which brings together all justice and emergency services in one purpose-built precinct in central Christchurch.The SCIRT horizontal infrastructure repair programme is also nearing completion.
Honourable Members.
Over the course of this year, other legislation will be put before the House and other policy initiatives will be pursued.
The Government has a busy work programme in front of it.
Our approach will remain as it always has been, taking the public with us by clearly outlining our actions and priorities, and always keeping in mind why we are in government – to make this country a better place for New Zealanders and their families.
Good afternoon. It’s great to see so many of you here today.
I want to start by acknowledging Mayor Len Brown, the Auckland Council and the Chamber of Commerce – all strong advocates for this city.
And I want to thank the Chamber for hosting this event.
Finally, can I acknowledge my ministerial colleagues Steven Joyce and Nikki Kaye. Unfortunately, Transport Minister Simon Bridges cannot be here today as he’s visiting Antarctica.
It’s good to kick off the New Year here in Auckland - New Zealand’s gateway city.
It’s home to one third of Kiwis, it’s our biggest commercial centre and our shopfront to the rest of the world.
Every region of New Zealand is crucial to our growth and progress.
But on New Zealand’s behalf, Auckland is competing with Asia-Pacific’s great global cities. It’s our version of Sydney, Singapore or Shanghai.
Lifting our standard of living requires strong and enduring global relationships, because we won’t get rich selling to ourselves.
New Zealand must expand its global supply chains, attract more investment and develop new markets.
As Prime Minister, I work every day to lead an open and confident country that backs itself on the world stage.
Auckland is at the forefront of that.
It’s important for all of New Zealand that Auckland succeeds as a great place to live and do business.
With success, however, comes challenges.
Strong growth is putting pressure on infrastructure, housing, public services and transport.
That’s typical of fast-growing cities around the world.
It’s one reason we decided in our first term to unite the city under one council, so we could better tackle these challenges.
It’s also why we’re backing Auckland by investing billions of dollars in modern infrastructure.
I’ll update you on some of those projects shortly.
But I first want to talk about the Government’s busy policy programme for 2016 and beyond.
As the National-led Government enters its eighth year, I can tell you it’s fantastic leading a team of ministers and MPs who remain energised and full of new ideas.
Busy agenda for 2016
We’re as busy now as we were in 2008. And that’s how it should be.
This year, for example, the Government will respond to a review of Child, Youth and Family to ensure our most vulnerable children get the care and protection they deserve.
We’ll press on with our social housing reforms to do a better job for tenants.
We’ll maintain our strong focus on law and order.
We’ll respond to a major review of security and intelligence agencies.
And we’ll complete an assessment of the Emissions Trading Scheme.
These are just a few examples of our work programme.
But building a strong economy that attracts new investment and creates more jobs will remain front and centre of the Government’s agenda.
That’s vitally important.
A strong, growing economy encourages businesses to boost investment in new products and markets, hire more staff and pay good wages.
It means New Zealanders can be rewarded for their enterprise and hard work.
And a strong economy supports better healthcare, education and other public services New Zealanders need.
We frequently hear Opposition parties calling for the Government to magic up more jobs, to increase wages or to spend more on any number of things.
Actually, governments can’t do any of those things without a strong, confident economy.
The Government’s role is creating an environment that gives businesses the confidence to invest and grow.
And to do that in the knowledge they’ll be backed by clear and sensible government policies.
My Government works on those issues every day.
We’re resolutely focused on improving our competitiveness.
TPP will help diversify the economy
A good example is the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement.
It will be New Zealand’s biggest free trade agreement, giving our exporters much better access to more than 800 million customers in 11 countries across Asia and the Pacific.
It’s our first FTA with the largest and third-largest economies in the world – the United States and Japan.
It will eliminate tariffs on 93 per cent of exports to our new FTA partners – the United States, Japan, Canada, Mexico and Peru.
Successive New Zealand governments have worked hard to achieve this for 25 years. They knew it would help diversify and grow the economy.
So it really is unthinkable that any responsible government would now walk away from the TPP.
It will be positive for our country and for our future.
The Government also remains focused on controlling spending, and demanding better results from our investment in public services.
We’re reducing ACC levies and maintaining competitive tax rates.
And we’re pushing on with our Business Growth Agenda, which includes hundreds of initiatives spanning export markets, investment, skills, natural resources, innovation and infrastructure.
They’re all essential ingredients in a competitive economy where businesses can thrive and grow.
Faced with a world economy full of risks and challenges, it’s important that we continue to focus on things we can influence – such as our own competitiveness.
The New Year has reminded us of those risks.
Concerns about China’s economic outlook and lower commodity prices have rippled through financial markets this month.
But global challenges are nothing new. They’re a fact of life in the modern world.
A resilient, competitive economy can deal with them.
And this Government has a track record of supporting New Zealanders through some of the biggest challenges you can imagine - including the global financial crisis and Canterbury earthquakes.
New Zealand well placed
As we look forward to 2016, New Zealand is well placed.
Global dairy prices remain low. But over time, they will recover and the New Zealand dairy sector is well-placed to attract growing numbers of middle-class customers in key markets.
In the meantime, tourism, construction, international education, ICT, high-tech manufacturing, services and a number of our primary industries are all growing and underpinning a solid outlook.
We remain one of the best places to do business.
Consumer and business confidence is picking up and I sense a feeling of optimism among New Zealanders.
The Treasury’s latest forecasts show economic growth averaging just under 3 per cent over the next five years.
Unemployment at 6 per cent remains higher than we would like and we’re working hard to help bring it down.
But the headline unemployment rate tells only part of the story.
An extra 160,000 jobs were created in the past three years – nearly 66,000 of them here in Auckland.
The Treasury expects another 195,000 jobs to be created across New Zealand by 2020.
While we’ve been the Government, the average wage has increased by more than double the rate of inflation.
And New Zealand has the third highest employment rate in the developed world.
That’s right: Our businesses employ a higher proportion of the working age population than almost any other developed country.
In terms of the Government’s finances, under Bill English’s careful management, we achieved our surplus target last year.
The Government is also investing billions of dollars in upgrading New Zealand’s infrastructure, to get the country moving – literally.
Since we took office, we’ve invested $4.5 billion in roads of national significance.
Central and local government have together allocated $8.8 billion for local roads.
In Auckland, we’ve completed the Victoria Park Tunnel, the Upper Harbour Highway and replaced the Newmarket Viaduct.
Taxpayers have also invested $3.2 billion in rail, including metro rail in Auckland and Wellington.
We’ve provided over $1.7 billion to roll out ultra-fast broadband and another $400 million for rural broadband.
All up, taxpayers have committed around $17 billion to the Canterbury rebuild.
And the Government is investing in schools, hospitals, housing and a lot of other public infrastructure.
Looking forward, we’ll invest another $11.5 billion in capital projects over the next two years alone.
This amounts to a significant investment in New Zealand’s future.
And these infrastructure projects are a rich source of jobs.
For example, Treasury estimates the Government’s Roads of National Significance will involve around 35,000 construction jobs.
Another 2,100 are expected from the regional state highway programme.
The major rail upgrade and electrification projects since 2009 are expected to result in over 3,000 jobs.
And a further 4,000 jobs are expected from rolling out ultra-fast and rural broadband.
So I’m pleased to make further announcements today about important infrastructure projects.
City Rail Link and business plan
The first concerns Auckland’s City Rail Link.
This will be one of New Zealand’s largest transport projects, with an estimated cost of around $2.5 billion.
The 3.4 kilometre underground line will run from Britomart station through the CBD to connect with the existing western line at Mt Eden station.
Auckland Transport estimates commuters travelling between Henderson and the planned Aotea Station will save an average 17 minutes per trip.
A couple of years ago, I said the Government was committed to a joint business plan for the Rail Link with Auckland Council in 2017.
We agreed to provide a share of funding for construction to start in 2020.
And we were prepared to consider an earlier start if Auckland’s rail patronage and CBD employment hit certain thresholds committed to by the Auckland Council.
CBD employment levels are still some way from the 25 per cent growth threshold.
But strong growth in rail patronage since 2013 means it will reach the 20 million annual trip threshold well before 2020.
It’s become clear that we need to provide certainty for other planned CBD developments affected by the Rail Link.
This means we see merit in starting the project sooner.
So I can today confirm the Government will work with the Council to bring forward the business plan and formalise our funding commitment from 2020.
The Council has indicated this would allow construction of the Rail Link’s main works to start in 2018 – at least two years earlier than currently envisaged.
It would also allow the council to get on with negotiating contracts and providing certainty for investors in other important Auckland CBD projects.
These include the $350 million NDG Auckland Centre next to the new Aotea Station and the $680 million Commercial Bay tower opposite Britomart.
Timely confirmation of these and other projects, alongside the Rail Link, will encourage more people, businesses and jobs into the heart of Auckland.
It should also reduce the period of disruption in the central city by concentrating construction over a shorter timeframe.
We still need to work through a number of important and quite complex issues with the Council.
These include how project costs will be finally shared between the Government and the Council and how the Rail Link will be owned and managed.
Providing these issues are resolved – and I’m confident they can be - we’ll aim to finalise the business plan later this year.
The Rail Link is one of several significant government transport projects in Auckland.
East-West Connection a priority
Another is the East-West Connection between the Southern and South-Western motorways, which is estimated to cost over $1 billion.
This is a large and complex project.
It’s a priority for Auckland because it will improve travel and freight times in this busy part of the city. It will also provide much better access between the Eastern Suburbs and the Airport.
We consider it a project of national significance.
So today I’m confirming the East-West Connection will go through a streamlined consenting process later this year to bring forward its construction.
That means a consenting decision will need to be made within nine months of application.
Subject to approval, it’s the Government’s intention to fund the East-West Connection through the Land Transport Fund so construction can start as early as 2018.
I’ve asked ministers and officials for advice on how this can be managed and achieved.
In the meantime, the Transport Agency will start early project work later this year on widening State Highway 20 between Neilson Street and Queenstown Road.
This is integral to the wider East-West Connection and will support traffic growth when the Waterview Tunnels open.
All up, over the next three years, around $4.2 billion will be invested in transport in and around Auckland.
We’re on track to complete the Western Ring Route by 2019.
The $200 million Te Atatu and Lincoln interchanges will open in March, and the $1.4 billion Waterview Connection is expected to open early next year.
Construction of the $1.3 billion Auckland Manukau Eastern Transport Initiative is underway. Stage one has been completed and work has started on designing and consenting for stage two.
The $268 million Southern Motorway upgrade started in October and is scheduled to be completed in late 2018.
And construction of the Northern Motorway Upgrade is expected to start in 2018. It will connect with the Western Ring Route and see the completion of the Northern Busway Extension through to Albany.
These projects underscore the Government’s strong backing of Auckland.
Commitment to regional roading
Ladies and gentlemen: Communities and businesses in our regions also need modern infrastructure that’s fit-for-purpose.
The Government is investing heavily in rural broadband and we’re developing regional highways.
In 2014, we set out an accelerated regional roading package.
It aimed to bring forward construction of regional highway projects that had previously struggled to attract national funding in the face of wider priorities.
Five of these projects are either finished or underway.
The Transport Agency last year confirmed funding for a further four projects, including bridge replacements and safety improvements in Horowhenua, the West Coast, Northland and Taranaki.
Today I’m pleased to confirm the Government is providing up to $115 million to complete the next four regional projects in this programme.
The two largest will be in Taranaki, where modern by-passes will allow motorists to avoid Mount Messenger and the Awakino Tunnel.
These new projects were not envisaged when we announced the regional roading programme two years ago.
Over many years, the northern gateway into Taranaki has suffered from a poor safety record, closures and delays.
Calls to improve this stretch of highway go back decades.
In fact, we’ve found a newspaper article from July 1918.
It reported a local deputation complaining to the Minister of Public Works about the impassable and unsatisfactory road over Mount Messenger.
The paper says, and I quote: “The Minister made a lengthy reply, stating that he had instructed his district engineer to prepare plans of work and that he would give as much money as could be obtained from the Minister of Finance.”
Believe me – I know how difficult that can be.
But Bill English has done better than his predecessors, and he’s coming up with the money needed for this important work.
Construction of the by-passes is expected to start in the next two years. This will bring huge benefits to Taranaki.
The Government will also provide funding to replace the single lane Motu Bridge on State Highway 2 near Gisborne with a new two-lane bridge.
And we’ll replace the Opawa Bridge on State Highway 1 near Blenheim with a safer bridge to accommodate increasing traffic volumes in Marlborough.
Improving housing supply
I’d also like to make some comments today about housing.
Housing supply, especially here in Auckland, is a longstanding issue.
There is no quick fix. That’s been the experience in fast-growing overseas cities.
Today, I want to make the Government’s expectations absolutely clear.
We must continue lifting the supply of new houses in Auckland to meet the demands of this growing city.
Everyone has a part to play – the Government, the Council, developers and community organisations.
And it’s encouraging to see a broader consensus emerging that this is a supply issue.
Progress is being made.
Around 9,000 building consents were issued in Auckland in the year to November.
That’s the highest figure for just over 11 years, although it’s still short of the 13,000 new houses forecast to be needed each year.
Officials estimate government-initiated projects will deliver at least 10,000 extra houses in Auckland by 2020 – including developments at Hobsonville Point and Tamaki.
The Government’s National Construction Pipeline Report predicts an extra 80,000 new homes will be built in Auckland in the six years to 2020 – more than double the rate of the preceding six years.
The Government is determined to ensure this busy pipeline delivers the houses Auckland needs as quickly as possible.
One priority is reforming the Resource Management Act to support more housing alongside better environmental management.
We introduced legislation just before Christmas and it’s currently before select committee.
It’s important we improve the RMA so we can tackle planning issues standing in the way of getting houses built faster.
So if other groups say they’re concerned about Auckland housing, you should tell them they need to support the RMA reforms.
Another priority is working intensively with the Auckland Council and others to free up land so more houses can be built sooner.
That includes the Auckland Housing Accord, which has seen almost 24,000 dwellings and sections consented in its first two years. The target is 39,000 consents before the end of this year.
We’ve set up 106 Special Housing Areas in Auckland.
And we’re working to resolve issues such as infrastructure development and building sector capacity.
For its part, the Government is identifying surplus Crown land that can be freed up for new housing and we’ll soon be in a position to make further announcements about the first projects.
In the Budget last year, we moved to ensure residential property investors – particularly those from overseas – pay their fair share of tax when buying and selling residential property for profit.
And we provided Inland Revenue with extra funding for compliance and enforcement.
Combined with the Reserve Bank’s tighter loan-to-value rules, these changes appear to have taken some heat out of the Auckland housing market in recent months.
Last month the Real Estate Institute reported the number of Auckland homes sold in November fell to the lowest level since 2011. And QV noted the rate of price growth was easing.
It’s still early days and we’ll need to see more data to be sure.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen: I sought election as Prime Minister because I believed New Zealand could do better as a country – much better.
I wanted us to become a more prosperous, more ambitious and more confident nation; a successful country comfortable in its own skin.
I also believed that if we set a course of considered and sensible reform year after year, we could again be one of the world’s best places to live and work.
We’re making good progress in a world full of challenges.
Our households and businesses are more resilient and more outward looking.
We’re grasping the many opportunities opening up on our doorstep in Asia and the Pacific.
And we’re providing more of our young people with opportunities to raise their families here instead of heading overseas.
But the job is far from finished.
Our challenge over the next few years is to stay on course and build on the good momentum we’re now seeing.
My Government is motivated to continue working hard for all New Zealanders.
Providing we stick with a plan that’s working, I know we can deliver the opportunities New Zealanders and their families deserve.
Thank you.
Mr President,
Let me begin by again conveying my condolences to the victims of the attacks here in Paris, to the people of Paris and the French Republic.
The people of New Zealand stand with you and New Zealand remains committed to global efforts to counter terrorism.
Against that backdrop I would like to acknowledge what a significant moment this is.
Over 150 countries working together to address climate change.
While New Zealand’s emissions are small on a global scale, we are determined to make a strong contribution to the international effort.
That’s why we have set ourselves a target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 30 per cent below 2005 levels, by 2030.
New Zealand faces unique domestic challenges in reducing emissions.
Almost 80 per cent of our electricity already comes from renewable energy and around half of our emissions are from agriculture - where there are not yet cost effective ways of reducing emissions.
However we are working hard to change that.
In 2009 we formed the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases, which looks at ways of reducing emissions from livestock, cropping and rice production.
They are doing some great work and I’m pleased to announce that New Zealand will boost its funding by $20 million to capitalise on some new research to reduce methane emissions.
Our emissions trading scheme – the first outside the EU ­– remains our key policy tool in reducing emissions.
We are currently reviewing the scheme, with a view to strengthening its provisions and deliver further reductions in emissions.
Although we have one of the highest rates of renewable electricity in the world, we want to go even further.
We’ve set ourselves a target of 90 per cent of renewable electricity by 2025 and are well on our way to achieving that.
We are also committed to helping our Pacific neighbours secure a future built on reliable and clean energy.
Today I am announcing New Zealand will provide up to $200 million for climate related support over the next four years, most of which will benefit Pacific Nations.
Subsidies for fossil fuels present a huge obstacle to innovation and progress in much of the world.
Earlier today I delivered UNFCCC Executive Secretary, Christiana Figueres, a message on behalf of close to 40 nations calling for the removal of fossil fuel subsidies.
These are practical initiatives aimed at getting real outcomes.
Mr President,
We don’t want just any deal. 
We want one that genuinely fulfils the Durban mandate.
New Zealand, and every country here, is determined play its part and make a real difference.
If not for us, then for our future generations.
Thank you.
Mr President.
The 70th anniversary of the United Nations is a good opportunity to reflect on the organisation. 
For most of us, the United Nations has been one of the key international realities of our lives. 
It has been at the heart of and has shaped the significant developments of the post-World War II era.
But, as we all know, it is not perfect.
A lot can be said about the shortcomings of the UN.
They are many and some are serious. 
But there are things this Organisation can do that no other international body can. 
And it remains the key reference point for States when there is a problem.
That is why New Zealand fought so hard for its seat on the Security Council. 
We sought election because the Council is the primary body for the maintenance of international peace and security.
New Zealand is a small country at the bottom of the world.
Despite being far away from many of the world’s trouble-spots, we are not immune from their consequences.
This time last year, I pressed the case for New Zealand’s election to the Security Council.
I would like to thank the Member States for their faith in us.
In the last nine months we have strived to repay this.
Much of the debate in this Chamber this week has been about where the United Nations – particularly the Security Council - has not performed. 
The conflicts and human suffering in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and a long list of other countries, show how far we are from achieving the aspirations of our founders and of today’s members.
So too does the lack of progress in bringing peace to the Middle East.
Since we have been on the Council, we have found it as hard as many of you warned.
The Council’s agenda is lengthy and contentious.
The dynamics within it are difficult.
When Council members work together, as they did with the recent agreement over Iran’s nuclear capability, they can still deliver on the Council’s role as set out in the Charter.   
The Iran deal was a notable bright spot this year.
While it was negotiated in Vienna, only the Council had the power to implement it. 
New Zealand is proud that this occurred during our Presidency in July.
Now, the deal needs to be implemented and its example needs to be followed.
That is because this important agreement must become the basis for something wider - a fundamental reset of relationships, and a foundation for the resolution of other regional conflicts.
Nowhere is the re-setting of relationships needed more than in Syria.
Syria has been torn apart by internal divisions and a leader prepared to wage war on his own people to cling to power. 
External actors, both from within the region and beyond, have tried to tilt the balance in pursuit of their own interests.
And as the country descended into lawlessness, the evil nightmare of ISIL that first took hold in Syria spread death and terror into the region and beyond.
ISIL’s warped ideology and unprecedented use of social media to export its twisted message is a threat to us all, even to a country as distant as New Zealand.
It is because of this that New Zealand joined the international coalition against ISIL.
We are doing what we can to help the victims of the Syrian conflict and to combat the scourge of ISIL.
New Zealand’s armed forces are helping the government of Iraq to train its soldiers to defend its people.
In response to the humanitarian crisis we are helping fund programmes in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey to assist their efforts to support thousands of displaced refugees.
Like many other countries we are also implementing an emergency Syrian refugee resettlement programme.
None of this gets to the root of the problems in Syria.
All Council members carry responsibility for ending the misery in Syria and beyond.
The consequences of inaction are not theoretical. The human toll is real.
A three-year-old boy dead, washed up on a Turkish beach; hundreds of thousands killed and millions forced to flee their homes.
We cannot ignore the huddled travellers in the railway stations of Europe, or the reality of refugees scratching out a meagre existence in camps or makeshift homes in Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon.
More than 160 leaders have shown up in New York this week to mark the enduring importance of the United Nations over the past 70 years.
Yet we do so against the backdrop of the worst refugee crisis since World War II.
Every one of us sees the harrowing images daily.
At the same time we see the consequences of the Security Council’s failure to act over the past four years.
It is time for the Council to step up.
It’s time for it to stop talking about what’s right and do what’s right.
It’s time for the Council to do the job for which it was created.
It’s time for its members to set aside their vested interests and historical alliances in order to stop the violence and end the suffering.
It’s time for the Council to do its duty for those who have lost their lives and loved ones, and for the millions who have been displaced.
We cannot afford to let the Council go from an institution with failings to a failed institution.
There must be a political solution to the conflict in Syria. And it must come soon.
It should address all issues and involve all relevant actors, from within the region and beyond. 
The question is not Assad or ISIL. Both need to be dealt with.    
A workable political solution will not be a perfect one.
Indeed this is a classic case of the perfect being the enemy of the good.
It will require international cooperation and compromise – on all sides.    
Mr President,
The Council also needs to engage in making progress on the Middle East Peace Process.
Since being elected to the Council New Zealand has made clear its view that the status quo is unsustainable.
It puts at risk the achievement of the two State solution that we all know is the best hope for a lasting peace.
This is a matter of urgency and another critical issue on which the Security Council should lead.
We are told that “the conditions are not right on the ground.”
“The parties are not ready.”
But we should not let conditions on the ground dictate our actions, if our actions can help progress a solution.
Mr President.
We stood for the Council because we believe small states have a positive contribution to make and we want to provide a voice for those who go unheard too often.
It was for this latter reason that we arranged the first open debate on the peace and security challenges of Small Island Developing States during our Presidency in July.
We were heartened by the level of participation – both by those States and the wider membership.
The challenge for a small elected member to have its voice heard and its views taken into account is considerable. 
Part of the problem is structural. 
That the five Permanent Members of the Council  have the veto creates an extraordinary power imbalance.
That imbalance is exacerbated by their practices of pre-negotiating outcomes before engaging with the 10 elected members.
And of taking no action when one of the five does not agree.    
This experience has reaffirmed to us that New Zealand was right to oppose the veto when the Charter was being negotiated.
It is still our view that the veto is a constraint on the effectiveness of the Council and realising the aspirations of the United Nations’ members. 
For that reason, New Zealand supports the two proposals being put forward this year – by the A.C.T. Group of countries and by France and Mexico – to limit the use of the veto in mass atrocity situations.
The fact that two Permanent Members are supportive is progress.
But part of the problem is also behavioural.
The Permanent Members have become used to exercising power and are protective of their privileged position. 
They presume to control the Council’s agenda and to determine its processes.
Despite this, we are doing what we can to ensure that the elected members have the information and the opportunity to contribute effectively to Council decision-making.
And, in turn, that it makes effective decisions.
We want to contribute to a Council that is genuinely focused on finding practical solutions to political problems and not on preserving the status quo.
We are well aware that the conflicts on the Council’s agenda are complex and not easily solved, but we are realistic in our expectations of what can be achieved. 
New Zealand believes that the body responsible for maintaining international peace and security has a responsibility to find solutions to the world’s most pressing crises.
Mr President.
Only the United Nations and its agencies have the capacity to focus world attention across a range of issues.
This was demonstrated last week with the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals.
We sincerely hope that it will be repeated in Paris in December with the adoption of a meaningful agreement on climate change.
Mr President,
Healthy and productive oceans are a key requirement for a sustainable future. 
I was pleased to announce earlier this week the creation a marine sanctuary around New Zealand’s Kermadec Islands.
The Kermadec Ocean Sanctuary will comprise 620,000 square kilometres of ocean in one of the most pristine and special environments on Earth.
The Sanctuary will be one of the world’s largest and most significant fully-protected marine areas. 
It will cover an area twice the size of our landmass and better protect the habitats of a huge array of sea creatures.
New Zealand is committed to managing our oceans responsibly and we are working with our Pacific neighbours to do the same.
We have committed a billion dollars in development assistance to the Pacific, focused on among other things, helping support sustainable fisheries management.
Our aid is focused on our region and in areas where we know we can get real results for real people, improving livelihoods and creating opportunities.
Many governments around the world are doing the same and we are proud to play our part.
Mr President.
As I prepare to leave New York, I do so proud of the contribution that New Zealand has made to the sustainable development of our oceans.
I leave proud of the contribution New Zealand is making on the Security Council.
And proud of the values and principles that underpin the country I lead.
I also leave dispirited by the Security Council’s failure to help not only the people of Syria but those in so many other countries.
The collective effort of the Security Council, supported by the wider membership, could make a real difference.
I think all of us who have been here over the past week know that collective action must start somewhere.
Mr President it should start here.
Good afternoon. Thank you Peter for that warm welcome and for the Chamber’s hosting of this event.
It’s good to see so many of you here today.
Can I start by acknowledging Mayor Lianne Dalziel and other local body representatives from around the region.
Just as central government has to make some tough decisions and trade-offs, so too do councils as we work together to rebuild this city.
Together, we’re making significant progress. Although, of course, there is still much to do.
I’d also like to acknowledge my ministerial colleagues Gerry Brownlee, Amy Adams and Nicky Wagner.
Gerry has provided strong leadership in overseeing what continues to be one of New Zealand’s largest and most complex undertakings.
Most recently he has been turning his mind to where we go following the expiry of the special earthquake recovery laws next April.
I’ll have some more to say about that in a few minutes.
As we’ve said before, the estimated cost of the rebuild is around $40 billion.
As a proportion of the economy, this makes it one of the most expensive natural disasters in the developed world.
So thanks to all of you here who have worked so hard since the first earthquake in September 2010.
I want to start today by talking about the economy and the significant contribution Canterbury makes to it.
A strong and growing economy allows us to provide essential public services like hospitals and schools, and support our most vulnerable families.
And a strong, growing economy supports more jobs and higher incomes.
For almost seven years now, the National-led Government has had a clear plan to build that kind of economy.
Since 2010, this plan has included considerable ongoing support for the people of Christchurch to rebuild this city.
Bill English’s seventh Budget in May set out the next steps in our plan.
It was delivered against the backdrop of solid economic growth, rising wages and more jobs.
For everyday New Zealanders, a growing economy is not about quarterly GDP numbers or whether we get back to surplus.
What really matters to families is the security provided by more jobs, higher incomes and opportunities to get ahead.
On these measures, New Zealand is making good progress.
For example, four years ago, the Treasury forecast there would be 171,000 new jobs across New Zealand by June 2015.
With three months of that forecast period still to be counted, some 194,000 new jobs have been created across the country.
So we’re 23,000 jobs ahead of forecast with three months to spare.
Almost 20 per cent of those new jobs over the past four years were created here in Canterbury.
This is down to our strong, growing economy and the confidence of New Zealand and Canterbury businesses to invest and hire more staff.
It’s just one sign that we’re heading in the right direction.
Another is the number of New Zealanders voting with their feet and either staying home or returning home from overseas.
This trend is particularly stark when we look at Trans-Tasman migration.
For the first time since 1991, the latest monthly data shows New Zealand has positive net migration from Australia. That’s quite a turnaround in just a few years.
I have no doubt it’s a vote of confidence in our economy and in our economic direction.
We’re making good progress, but our job is not done.
The Government is focused and energised. We have a busy work programme for the next few years to lock in our hard-won gains.
We need to continue encouraging investment and lifting our competitiveness.
That’s the best way to create new jobs and increase incomes.
And we cannot ignore a number of global risks.
They include falling dairy prices and little or slowing growth among some of our trading partners – including China.
As events in Greece this week show, economic problems in one country can quite quickly spill over into financial markets around the world.
New Zealand is not immune to these risks.
So the Government is focused firmly on increasing our resilience and building a strong platform for growth into the future.
We have a track record of providing New Zealanders with a steady and supportive hand during challenging times.
Moving forward, we’re backing New Zealanders with a responsible plan.
In particular, we have four main priorities:
First - responsibly managing the Government’s finances, so your taxes are spent wisely on the services New Zealanders need.
Second - building a more productive and competitive economy to support more jobs, raise incomes and build opportunities for Kiwi families.
Third - delivering better public services so that schools better educate our young people, so our communities are safer and so families get the healthcare they need.
And our final priority is continuing to support the rebuilding of Christchurch, so people here in Canterbury can fully enjoy life in this city.
Budget 2015 built on these priorities in a number of ways.
We provided considerable extra work incentives and support for the lowest-income families in New Zealand.
At the same time, we continued to control government spending and demand better results from that spending.
We allowed for further significant ACC levy reductions.
We strengthened tax rules on property investment.
We provided extra support for business R&D, science and innovation – alongside significant ongoing investment in roads and ultra-fast broadband.
We supported health and education with an extra investment of $2.4 billion over the next four years.
And we’ve provided a further $1 billion for the Canterbury rebuild, cementing the Government’s ongoing commitment to the recovery effort.
This takes the Government’s total contribution to the rebuild since 2010 to $16.5 billion.
Put all of this together, and this is a plan that’s working for New Zealand and New Zealanders.
As I mentioned, Canterbury continues to make a significant contribution to our growing economy.
This region remains one of the country’s top performers, having posted 16 consecutive quarters of economic growth.
Canterbury contributes just over 13 per cent of New Zealand’s total GDP.
Its unemployment rate is the lowest in New Zealand at just 3.1 per cent.
Nearly 30,000 extra jobs have been created in the region over the last two years.
And the population of Greater Christchurch has now recovered to above where it was before the 2010 earthquake.
So the Crusaders might not have made the Super 15 playoffs this year. But Canterbury’s economy is certainly on a winning run.
As I’ve said, supporting Christchurch is one of the Government’s four main priorities.
Since the first earthquake in September 2010, we’ve backed Cantabrians in the initial response and now in the recovery and rebuild.
Working together, we’re making real progress.
While we would all like to see some things happen a bit faster, central and local government is investing tens of billions of dollars on behalf of taxpayers and ratepayers.
So we owe it to them to make considered decisions and to execute them well.
And let’s remember: this is a large and hugely complex undertaking.
Each time I return to Christchurch, I’m heartened by the progress I see across the city.
In recent months, I’ve had the privilege of opening a number of new facilities in and around the city.
They include Foodstuffs’ new South Island distribution centre, the Christchurch Polytech Institute of Technology, Tait Communications’ global headquarters and Plunket’s new Canterbury regional office.
And I turned the first sod for the new Russley Road interchange, which is part of a massive investment in upgrading the city’s roads.
Many more projects have been completed or are underway.
They are a tribute to everyone involved.
The scale of the anchor projects in central Christchurch is impressive.
The first stage of the Bus Interchange opened in late May and it’s making it easier for people to get around the city.
I’m looking forward to returning to the Justice and Emergency Precinct this afternoon and meeting some of the people who will work there. 
The Precinct is well advanced and is on track to be completed late next year.
Christchurch has a reputation for embracing innovation and new technology. It’s good to see the Innovation Precinct becoming a popular address for innovative firms in this city.
A number of new and emerging businesses will be located in the GreenHouse hub within the precinct.
They will sit alongside the precinct’s anchor tenants Vodafone, Kathmandu and Wynyard Group, as well as Callaghan Innovation, New Zealand Trade and Enterprise and the ICT Graduate School.
Planning is also underway on two other landmark projects – the Convention Centre and the Metro Sports Facility.
There has been plenty of local debate about these projects.
But let me be clear: The Government is committed to delivering both of these facilities for the people of Christchurch.
Both are considerable investments.
So it’s essential that we all carefully consider design options and invest the substantial sums of money required wisely.
From the Government’s point of view, we’re committed to working with the council and other stakeholders to find solutions that work for both taxpayers and ratepayers.
That’s the approach we’ve taken with all investments in Christchurch.
When we’ve worked through that process, we look forward to providing an update in the coming months on the way forward for both the Convention Centre and the Sports facility.
As you will know, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act and its associated powers expire in April next year.
The Government has two priorities as we move through this phase.
We will continue to support the people of Canterbury and honour our commitments to successfully complete the regeneration of the city.
At the same time, we will work closely with councils and other local stakeholders to progressively pass governance and management of the rebuild to the Canterbury community.
Meeting these objectives requires a careful balance.
So today I want to set out our proposed approach to these transition arrangements.
And I’ll give you some details about an exciting new residential precinct planned for the central city.
Earlier this year Gerry Brownlee established an Advisory Board, chaired by Dame Jenny Shipley, to provide advice on the transition plan.
I thank Dame Jenny and Board members for their thoughtful report, which we’re making public today.
It calls for a demonstrable step-change in local leadership and institutional performance over the next three to five years, as we move to the next stage of regeneration in Christchurch.
The report notes that ongoing central government support will be needed.
And it says we need to do more to give the private sector confidence to invest in central city developments.
After considering the Board’s recommendations and discussing options with the Council, the Cabinet this week agreed in principle to several aspects of the transition arrangements.
First, we will introduce new legislation later this year to replace the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act.
It will be called the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Bill.
We envisage the most directive powers under the current legislation will either expire or be amended to provide explicit roles for councils and, in certain cases, Ngai Tahu.
The new legislation will apply to a much smaller area and some core provisions will be updated.  It will expire in five years.
There will be an opportunity for further engagement with strategic partners, including the City Council.
And there will be an opportunity for public feedback, including through Parliament’s select committee process.
We will work to pass the new legislation by March, in time for it to take effect in April.
The second part of the transition relates to winding up the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority.
By next April, most of CERA’s functions will either end or be transferred to other government agencies.
A small set of key ongoing roles will be moved into a business unit within the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
This will ensure the Government maintains effective oversight of Christchurch recovery issues.
So the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet will provide overall coordination, monitoring and advice on future use of the red zone.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment will lead the residential rebuild, procurement and oversight of the public sector rebuild.
The Ministry of Health and Land Information New Zealand will pick up other operational functions.
The Advisory Board noted the recovery of the central city is at a critical point and requires a step-change in approach.
The Government agrees.
We also agree with the Board that the anchor projects and precincts must be completed in a timely and effective manner – and with greater commercial discipline.
So the third aspect of the transition is setting up a new entity, which we propose to call Regenerate Christchurch.
The Earthquake Recovery Minister will work closely with the Mayor, the City Council and officials on how this new organisation will operate.
We expect it will work along the lines of an urban development authority.
It will deliver on both the Government’s and City Council’s objectives for the central city.
We will work together to establish its objectives, functions, funding and powers – along with the appointment of a board.
This will involve looking at a possible integration with Development Christchurch – the Council’s new development authority.
Following this consultation, the Minister will report back to Cabinet by the end of August with more detailed proposals.
Over the next few years, responsibility for regenerating the central city will transfer progressively to the City Council.
That’s important.
It’s in line with the Advisory Board’s view that central government should continue to be aligned closely with the City Council to ensure that regeneration of the central city is successful.
The final aspect of the transition arrangements will be the Minister’s notification and release today of the draft Transition Recovery Plan prepared by CERA.
There will be around one month for public comments and submissions.
CERA is issuing details of these transition proposals this afternoon and the Minister will consider a final plan later this year.
Taken together, I believe these proposals will allow the Government to continue working constructively with the City Council and others in Christchurch on the next stages of the rebuild.
As Prime Minister, I’m committed to ensuring that happens.
Looking forward, it’s also important that people are attracted back into central Christchurch to live and work.
I was not surprised to learn that the number of people living in the central city fell by more than a third between the 2006 and 2013 census counts.
The strong message from major developers and business owners is that a successful residential precinct is essential for further investment in retail and other projects.
It’s hard to argue with them.
So today I can also confirm that Fletcher Residential has been selected as the Government’s preferred development partner for a new $800 million residential precinct in central Christchurch.
The East and North Frame Residential Precinct will provide around 940 new townhouses and apartments to accommodate up to 2,200 residents.
And there will be space for small-scale commercial activities to support the residential community.
For its part, the Government will sell seven hectares of land between Manchester and Madras Streets, from the river down to Lichfield Street, along with a small block in the North Frame.
Fletchers will progressively purchase blocks of land as the residential development is constructed and sold.
Construction will be spread over eight or nine years, and we expect the first homes to be completed within 18 months of a development agreement being signed.
We anticipate that will happen by the end of November this year.
Fletchers will be responsible for designing, building and selling the completed development, subject to minimum requirements agreed with the Government.
The townhouses and apartments are likely to be priced at between $400,000 and $900,000, but this will be for Fletchers to determine.
When finished, the new precinct is expected to increase the inner city population by around 45 per cent.
In turn, it will support the Government’s investment in other anchor projects and further stimulate private sector development.
So looking ahead, I’m really confident about the future of Christchurch and the next stages of its rejuvenation.
I understand that many of you are frustrated that some things are not happening as fast as you would like.
However, I’m confident the changes I’ve announced today will help speed things up.
From the Government’s perspective, there is no question about our ongoing commitment to the people and communities of this city and this region.
We’re committed to continue working constructively with local councils, the business community and other groups to ensure we all get the best outcome possible.
New Zealand needs Christchurch and Canterbury to be doing well.
I hope the announcements I’ve made today will provide further certainty about how we can ensure that happens.
Thank you.
It’s a pleasure to be with you here in Dubai this morning to open this business seminar.
And I’d like to thank the Dubai Chamber of Commerce for hosting this event today.
As you may be aware, I arrived in Dubai last night after attending significant war commemorations in Turkey.
Today marks the beginning of my visit to several Gulf States, and I’d like to thank you for the warm welcome I’ve received.
I’ve wanted to travel to the Gulf States for some time because they are increasingly important economic, political and security partners for New Zealand.
Today I have with me a delegation of senior business leaders from New Zealand who are either already doing business in the Gulf or actively looking to build a presence here.
Building relationships is vital, so I’m looking forward to seeing my counterparts over the next few days and also meeting senior business leaders.
The primary focus of my visit is the economic and trade relationship although I will be discussing other issues along the way too.
When I look at New Zealand’s economic and trade relationship with the Gulf States I see enormous potential to expand and deepen our links.
We come from very different places.
New Zealand is a green, island nation at the bottom of the South Pacific Ocean renowned for its world class agricultural production and food.
The Gulf States are economic powerhouses in the Middle East and world class energy producers.
While our economies are different - and we would say complementary - one thing we have in common is that we both rely on trade.
Today presents a fantastic opportunity to highlight the strong business connections between New Zealand and the Gulf Cooperation Council, and the many opportunities for New Zealand to grow our economic and political relationship with this important region.
The GCC countries are among the wealthiest in the world and are home to around 50 million people.
Collectively, the GCC is New Zealand’s fifth largest export destination with goods exports worth $1.9 billion in 2014.
But our governments have agreed that we want to do more to take that to the next level.
For our part, we have a Gulf Cooperation Council strategy which lays out our plans for further developing strong government and private sector relationships with the GCC.
The three key goals of this five-year strategy are to build strong and enduring political relationships, to expand trade and economic relationships and to enhance our connectivity with the region.
Although we have been engaging with the Gulf States over many years, this strategy is a starting point for deeper, more complementary linkages.
We’re also investing in more Government resources in the region.
For example, tomorrow I will open an expanded NZ Consulate General in Dubai which reflects the growth in the number of NZ companies seeking to do business here.
Within the GCC, the United Arab Emirates and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia are priority markets for New Zealand.
Our current trade is dominated by goods that you would expect, such as energy and agriculture.
Our dairy products make up the vast bulk of what we send to this region, and in turn New Zealand imports a lot of oil from here.
We are justifiably proud of the success that New Zealand food and agricultural technology firms are enjoying here.
New Zealand has been exporting dairy and meat to this region for more than 30 years, but over recent years our food and beverage offering has grown and changed significantly.
On supermarket shelves here today, you might find Whittaker’s Chocolate, Phoenix Organics, Tegel chicken and Comvita products from New Zealand.
Many others supply meat, seafood and specialist ingredients to hotels and restaurants.
There is strong demand for New Zealand food and beverages that are of high quality, healthy and halal – making us a natural partner for the GCC states.
But when I look around this room today, I see far more than our world class food and beverage offering.
New Zealand companies in agri-technology, aviation, information and communications technology, health IT, construction and manufacturing, healthcare and professional services and education consulting all have a presence here.
More than 120 New Zealand companies are active in the region and many of them represented here today are making Dubai their hub for the wider GCC and the Middle East.
Not far from here is the manufacturing facility of Pultron Composites between Dubai and Abu Dhabi.
Pultron makes specialised components that are used in a range of applications including sail battens and security fencing.
This is just one example of the increasingly specialised and high tech manufacturing and services that New Zealand can offer.
When we look at growing and deepening our ties, New Zealand offers many opportunities for businesses and investors from the Gulf.
We’ve made our country an attractive place to do business.
Since I became Prime Minister in 2008 we have come through the Global Financial Crisis and now have one of the fastest growing developed economies in the world.
I lead a Government with a careful and balanced economic programme which backs investment and business.
We are ranked first in the world for protecting investors according to the World Bank Doing Business Report.
We are ranked first in the world for ease of starting a business, with a competitive and low compliance tax system.
Transparency International named us the second least corrupt nation in the world last year.
We have transparent foreign investment policies and apply them fairly and consistently.
Our geographical proximity to markets in the Asia-Pacific region, and extensive network of free trade agreements, provides us with excellent access to key global markets.
In my view a free-trade agreement between New Zealand and the GCC would take our economic relationship to the next level, and stimulate new ties between New Zealand and the Gulf States in a whole range of areas.
Negotiations on a New Zealand – GCC FTA were concluded in October 2009.
A key focus of my visit over the next few days will be engaging with my Gulf counterparts about the importance we attach to finalising the FTA and bringing it into force.
I think the time is right to get this agreement over the line.
Over the past 30 years New Zealand has steadily built a strong international network of trade agreements.
These FTAs have benefited both partners and stimulated economic and broader linkages.
I strongly believe this will also be demonstrated when the New Zealand and GCC FTA comes into force.
The FTA will eliminate millions of dollars in tariffs, meaning  cheaper products for consumers in both New Zealand and the Gulf States.
Our economies are complementary so free trade will support the strategic economic needs of both sides.
For the Gulf States, this includes the strategic interest of securing reliable, high quality food security partners.
The FTA would also be an important signal to other countries that both sides are open for business, and provide a foundation for greater political engagement and deeper relationships.
Organisations like the Dubai Chamber of Commerce and the New Zealand Middle East Business Council have a crucial role in fostering business linkages and supporting trade. 
As business leaders in the region, this FTA will benefit you. We would therefore welcome your support for it.
In closing, I’m very much looking forward to the next few days.
My delegation and I are here to reinforce our commitment to the Gulf region, to support trade, and build the relationships that will help to raise New Zealand’s profile and presence here.
We are committed to working in partnership with the UAE, and with other states in the GCC.
It's been a pleasure to be here. Thank you very much.
Shokran.
There are places on this peninsula whose names will never be forgotten.
Each country remembers where their soldiers fought, and where they fell.
Places where extraordinary bravery was shown, in unspeakable conditions.
For New Zealanders, nowhere in Gallipoli is more special than here on Chunuk Bair.
It was not the scene of a great triumph.
But it was the closest the Allied forces came to making a breakthrough in the whole Gallipoli campaign.
And it was led by a few hundred Kiwis, 10,000 miles from home.
We are the descendants and countrymen of the New Zealanders who fought and died on this hilltop.
From here we see the terrain that Colonel William Malone and his men in the Wellington Battalion made out as the dawn rose, almost 100 years ago.
We do not come merely as sightseers.
We come to feel closer to those who came here before us, 100 years ago.
By being here, we can imagine them climbing this hill with rifle in hand, squinting in the dark. Alert. Apprehensive.
We can see why this range of hills was so important – it’s the highest ground for many miles.
Australian and New Zealand units began attacking this range, and the approaches to it, on August 6, 1915.
The Auckland Battalion tried to take Chunuk Bair but was forced back with heavy casualties.
Next in line was the Wellington Battalion, but its commanding officer, Colonel Malone, refused to send his men to their certain deaths in a daylight attack.
They waited until night fell.
Shortly after 3am the New Zealanders, together with some British soldiers, reached the summit where we are now standing.
For the next day they held this position against repeated attacks.
They fought with their rifles and their bayonets, with only one trench for shelter.
Almost all of the Wellington Battalion were killed or wounded including, Colonel Malone.
He was but one of the 2,700 New Zealanders to die on this peninsula during the Gallipoli campaign.
One more telegram bearing the news that one more family prayed never to receive.
As night fell, the survivors were relieved, but the hilltop was soon recaptured by Ottoman Turkish troops.
Their commander was Mustafa Kemal, who later became a great leader and the first President of Turkey.
On a hill by the sea in Wellington there is a monument – the Ataturk memorial – that remembers the man and the soldiers who died defending their homeland.
Like the New Zealanders, they were brave, and were mourned by their grieving families and friends.
Today, I want to acknowledge them, as well as the young men from many other countries who fought and died on this peninsula.
And I want to thank the Turkish government and people.
It is their understanding and generosity that enables us to come to Gallipoli each year and it has made possible this one hundredth commemoration.
There is no way to sanitise what took place here in Gallipoli and nor should we try.
Over a few months, 100 years ago, tens of thousands of men died on the hills that surround us and on the beaches below us.
The geography helps us understand the military campaign, but it is the historical and cultural significance that is more enduring.
The sacrifice of so many men from such a small country as New Zealand was harrowing.
Our losses and achievements here and elsewhere in the First World War, had a profound effect on New Zealand’s view of its abilities, its identity and, ultimately, its sovereignty.
Over the past century, our country’s role in this and other campaigns has been widely debated.
But what can never be doubted is the fact that the soldiers who fought here, on both sides, served their countries with great courage and honour.
No more could have been asked of them then than what they gave.
And there is no more we can give them now than our respect.
And to renew the pledge we make on this day, every year – that we will always remember them.
On this beach, on this day, at this hour, exactly 100 years ago, the first Anzac troops came ashore.
Instead of the open spaces that had been described to them, they landed here with steep hills rising in front of this narrow beach.
And in those hills, Ottoman Turkish soldiers were already positioned and ready to defend this land.
We New Zealanders rarely think of ourselves as anyone’s enemy, or as aggressors.
But that’s exactly how those soldiers would have seen the Anzac and other Allied troops on April 25, 1915, and in the grinding months of fighting that followed.
We have coastlines similar to this at home.
If, for a moment, we imagine the situation reversed, we know that New Zealand soldiers would have been willing to lay down their lives to defend their country.
So, of course, were the Ottoman Turks.             
Time and the perspective of history have cast the Gallipoli campaign, and some of the military decisions that were made, in a different light.
But 100 years ago, both sides were doing what they believed was right, and what they believed was necessary.  
There was something else the Anzac troops landing here at Gallipoli did not know as they first struggled onto this foreign soil.
It was that their bravery and unity would help to forge the Anzac bond and reputation that endures to this day.
I salute that, as I do the bravery of the troops who opposed them, and all those who fought on this peninsula.
The campaign waged here ensured that the name of this place would be written into the histories of New Zealand, Australia, Britain, Turkey, and the many other countries that fought here – never to be erased.
Since then, New Zealanders have fought on many other battlegrounds, with similar courage and tenacity.
Everywhere a New Zealander has died serving our country is part of our history.
As the centenary of the First World War progresses, we will remember many battles in many different places.
But here today on this special anniversary we remember Gallipoli.
The very name is evocative.
Gallipoli to us Kiwis means not only this sea, this beach, these cliffs and the narrows across the hills.
It means the names and stories of more than 2,700 New Zealanders who died here, and the parents, wives and families who grieved for them, and the friends who said goodbye and didn’t know it was forever.
To us, Gallipoli is also a byword for the best characteristics of Australians and New Zealanders, especially when they work side by side in the face of adversity.
Gallipoli symbolises too, the pity of war.
Because while this was a place of courage and heroism and duty, it was also a place of fear and waste and loss.
It was a place where soldiers lived in a jumble of trenches, sometimes just metres apart from the opposing side, and constantly under fire.
It was a place of unspeakable suffering on both sides of the fighting. 
The generosity of Turkey in welcoming us back here year after year, means that Gallipoli also symbolises the healing power of time, forgiveness and diplomacy.
We are grateful to the Turkish people and the Turkish government.
Each year our hosts accommodate and assist the many Australians and New Zealanders who come to see with their own eyes a special place in our countries’ history.
Often it is a special place in their family’s history too – where a great-grandfather, or a great-uncle served.
They come to see what he saw with his own eyes, 100 years ago, looking up from this very beach.
Usually at these commemorations we conclude by saying “‘Lest we Forget”.
But today, witnessed by all of you who have gathered here out of respect and remembrance, I will not say “Lest we forget”.
Because after one hundred years we can say, on this day
April 25, Two Thousand and 15, 
“We remember”.
One hundred years ago today, thousands of young New Zealand and Australian soldiers waited anxiously for the orders that would send them ashore in an attempt to secure the Gallipoli Peninsula.
On shore, Turkish soldiers from their 9th and 19th Divisions waited just as anxiously, prepared to lay down their lives to protect their homeland.
Two days later, 25 April - Anzac Day - thousands of soldiers on both sides were dead or wounded, on the first day of a campaign that would last eight harsh months.
When the forces of the British Empire finally withdrew in December 1915, the Canakkale Land Battles had claimed over 130,000 lives.
Over the next two days, at Anzac Cove, Lone Pine, Chunuk Bair and at Turkish, Commonwealth and Irish, and French services, we will be remembering and honouring all those who served their countries with honour, and who fell at Gallipoli 100 years ago. 
When Australian and New Zealand troops landed on the shores of Gallipoli in April 1915, we came to fight a people we knew little of, and with whom we had no real quarrel.
The brutality of the Gallipoli battlefield was undeniable.
But there are also documented examples of acts of kindness and gallantry by soldiers on both sides.
And, from the cauldron of war, an enduring bond between our three countries emerged.
This bond continues to be epitomised by Ataturk’s immortal words of reconciliation to the mothers of the ANZAC fallen.  
Gallipoli demonstrates that forgiveness and respect between former adversaries can provide a foundation for the emergence of close, warm ties, in peace.
For New Zealand and Australia, it was at Gallipoli, also, that our young nations began to come of age.
It was from here that we began to think of ourselves as not just parts of the British Empire, but as distinct national entities.  
Out of the carnage of Gallipoli, and then Palestine and European campaigns that would follow, our countries emerged with a new sense of certainty about our own destiny and our place in the world.
It was in Gallipoli that the enduring ANZAC bond between New Zealanders and Australians was first forged.
Since then, our soldiers have often served together with many other nations, in international peace-keeping missions across the globe.
For Turkey, too, Gallipoli was a turning point.
The invasion was repelled, albeit at great cost.
The commander responsible for the defence of Gallipoli, Mustafa Kemal, would emerge from the campaign as a national hero.
Within a few short years, he would become Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the founding President of the Turkish Republic.
One hundred years on from this defining campaign in our countries’ histories, we are facing security threats of a very different nature.
Drawing much of its strength from the tragic, ongoing conflict in Syria, ISIL has brought this region into chaos.
It has torn people from the land they called home and committed widespread and horrific atrocities.
It revels in publicising its atrocities and inciting fear.
Meanwhile it is also attempting to expand its territory beyond Syria and Iraq and into the wider Middle East region and Africa.
ISIL and its network of affiliates have used the tools of the modern world – social and mainstream media, the internet, freedom and ease of international travel – to broadcast its messages of intolerance, and to demonstrate its unspeakable brutality to the world. 
It has tapped into networks thousands of miles from the land it occupies.
It entices foreign fighters and extremists to come to this region and fuel this fire, or otherwise to incite others around the world to commit brutal acts in their own countries.
And because the threat that ISIL represents does not respect borders, all nations – whether they are in the heart of the turmoil, or thousands of miles away – have a role to play in confronting the threat presented by ISIL and other violent extremist groups.
This is as true for New Zealand as it is for all countries here today.
Though thousands of miles from the region, we are a nation of travellers – as evidenced by the thousands of New Zealanders who travel to Turkey each year.
We have close, and important, relations with countries in the Middle East, in Europe and closer to home in the Asia Pacific – where terrorist groups are operating.
We are also a small country with a fundamental interest in supporting stability and the rule of law internationally.
So we believe that countries like New Zealand must play a role, along with others here today, in standing up to the brutality and extremism of ISIL.
We have joined the more than 60 countries in the international coalition facing ISIL. 
And, as I speak to you today, New Zealand and Australia are once again preparing to deploy alongside each other.
We are doing so at the request of Iraq to help train and support that country in its fight against ISIL.
And we are doing so to play our part in ensuring ISIL cannot continue to threaten innocent lives.
New Zealand is also doing its bit to try to alleviate some of the region’s humanitarian suffering, caused firstly by the Syrian conflict, and then also by ISIL and other extremist groups as they take advantage of the carnage.
Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan and others are bearing the weight of millions of refugees.
This is why we have also provided aid to assist some of those people who have had their lives destroyed in unimaginable ways.
New Zealand’s contributions are modest compared to many others.
But, together, the collective efforts of the international community are slowly starting to bear fruit: ISIL’s successes are waning.
There is still work to do.
We need to ensure that our own people do not travel to the region to exacerbate this conflict.
Alongside many countries, New Zealand has brought in law enforcement and passport control measures to stem the flow of foreign fighters.
We are also playing our part in ensuring ISIL and other violent extremist groups cannot continue to use the benefits of a globalised financial system to fund its murderous campaign.
We know, however, that violent extremism cannot be combatted by security measures alone.
Until we can address the conditions that set the stage for groups like ISIL to rise in the first place, we will continue to see their emergence.
This requires strong political will and sustained commitment at all levels of government.
We need to better understand why some of our people choose a path to violent extremism, and how we can counter the factors that lead to this. 
This issue is not unique to the Middle East, or to any single region.
The crimes of Boko Haram in Nigeria and the countries surrounding Lake Chad, and of Al-Shabaab in Somalia and Kenya, are just as grave as those we are witnessing in Iraq and Syria.
Violent extremist groups find traction in times of major societal stress.
To defeat those extremists the international community must promote the cause of inclusive, multi-cultural, multi-religious societies.
There are some other obvious issues in the region that continue to stand in the way of an inclusive peace.
The civil war in Syria is clearly one of them.
We need to redouble efforts towards reaching a political solution to the violent stalemate in Syria.
This has seen over 220,000 killed, and led to more than 3.8 million Syrians fleeing their country.
Moreover, New Zealand also underscores the importance of the Middle East Peace Process for security and stability in the region.
New Zealand has long been a strong supporter of a negotiated, two-state solution as the only real basis for an enduring Israeli-Palestinian peace.
The next few months provide an opportunity to reinvigorate the Middle East Peace Process and to bring the two parties together once more to negotiate a lasting peace.
New Zealand, as a friend of both Israel and the Palestinian Authority, and as a member of the Security Council, stands ready to work with the two parties and interested countries to advance this issue.
In confronting the challenges of international peace and security, we also need to draw on the established collective security system.
Peacekeeping – with all its imperfections – has shown itself to be a remarkably agile tool.
The increasing reliance on these operations shows just how much stock the international community places in peace operations in maintaining international peace and security.
New Zealand has been a continuous contributor to peace support operations since they were established.
New Zealand has served in over 40 UN-led peacekeeping missions in over 15 countries, with many deployments to this region.
In our own region in recent history, New Zealand has played a leading role in recent peacekeeping operations in Timor Leste, Solomon Islands and Bougainville.
We often deploy alongside and work very closely with Australia, very much in the ANZAC spirit, which remains alive and well to this day.
New Zealand continues to maintain a focus on the security of our neighbours in the Pacific and Asia Pacific.
We continue to look for new opportunities to work with our friends, on building regional capacity to respond to emerging security challenges.
Today we come together to commemorate the sacrifices made by those 100 years ago.
Those individuals – be they Turkish, New Zealanders, Australians, or from any other country – were caught up in the violence a century ago.
One goal they all had in common was a safer and more secure future for their children and grandchildren.
That goal remains as elusive and as challenging for us today as it was for our forebears.
But today, at this International Peace Summit, we have an opportunity – and an obligation – to confirm our dedication to working together in that search for a more peaceful world.
It is a pleasure and it is also fitting to be here with my Australian counterpart today for the dedication of this magnificent memorial.
This park was opened only two days ago, though its origins date back to 1919 when the government agreed to build a National War Memorial here in Wellington.
It was to be visible from any part of the city, from ships entering the harbour, and from Parliament, so that future governments would remember the sacrifice that had been made in the First World War. 
Since the Carillon opened in 1932, this memorial space has been added to several times and the latest addition is this fine Australian Memorial that we are dedicating today.
We always hoped that our closest friend would be the first country to have its own memorial in our park, and I am delighted that this has now happened.
Five days from now we will stand beside our Australian friends again, but this time at Gallipoli for the 100th commemoration of the first landing by the Anzacs on that ill-fated shore. There will be other significant services around the world, and right here, as well as in Canberra.
The name Gallipoli has become synonymous with acts of great courage, immense hardship and terrible sacrifice on both sides of the campaign.
For New Zealanders and Australians in particular, it is also the symbolic beginning of what we now think of as the Anzac spirit.
I was privileged to be in Albany last November to commemorate the first coming together of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force and the Australian Imperial Force – the origins of the Anzacs a hundred years before.
In fact, the bond between our two countries goes back to the early decades of European settlement and we have had close links ever since.
The Anzac spirit has been defined in many ways – mateship, courage, integrity. But what it means in practice is that we can knuckle down and work together anywhere from a solid foundation of mutual trust.
We have a proud history of co-operation in the world’s conflict zones the names of these places are listed on the memorial pillars. They include South Africa, Gallipoli, Northern France, Greece, Crete, North Africa, Korea, Malaya, Vietnam and, more recently, Timor Leste, the Solomon Islands and Afghanistan.
We also collaborate to bring humanitarian relief to disaster zones around our region and beyond. As we speak, we have teams working very closely together in Vanuatu for the Cyclone Pam recovery effort.
And when we are in need ourselves, we are there for each other too.
Australia’s support meant a great deal to us practically and emotionally when the devastating Canterbury earthquakes struck.
New Zealand is equally resolved to go to Australia’s aid – as we have done around terrible bush-fires and floods in recent years.
As well as brothers in arms we are trade partners, tourists in each other’s countries, we enjoy strong family connections and work together in many international forums to advance our mutual interests.
We like to take the mickey out of each other and are fierce rivals on the sports field. But when it comes to the crunch, we have each other’s backs, every time. It’s what mates do.
Our New Zealand Memorial standing proudly at the head of Anzac Parade in Canberra is of great significance to New Zealanders, representing the deeds of the ANZACs and our most important relationship in war and in peace.
We continue to be grateful to Australia for the generosity shown to us in that special commemorative zone.
Now we welcome the Australian Memorial having pride of place in our own national commemorative precinct, Anzac Square.
Like its brother in Canberra, this is a monument to past sacrifice and future endeavour, and to the bonds between our people and yours.
On behalf of all New Zealanders I thank the Australian Federal Government and the Australian people for this gift.
Thank you all for being here to witness the official opening of this park as a place of commemoration and remembrance for the whole nation.
This opening comes as we are focussed on the 100th commemorations of the First World War.
That war had a deep and abiding impact on New Zealand and New Zealanders.  In our small nation, almost every family was affected by it.
It is hard to describe the scale of mourning in the decade that followed the end of the war. People wanted to ensure that the sacrifice of their family members and fellow citizens would never be forgotten.
This desire to remember led to more than 500 local war memorials being erected in communities around the country.
In 1919 the Government agreed to build a National War Memorial here in Wellington. 
It was to be placed so it would be visible from any part of the city, from ships entering the harbour, and from Parliament so that future governments would never forget the sacrifice that had been made.
The Carillon was completed and opened in 1932 in front of a crowd of more than 50,000 people. The Hall of Memories was added 32 years later. More recently, in 2004, we saw the return of New Zealand’s Unknown Warrior.
Today, with the opening of Pukeahu National War Memorial Park, we add another dimension and a place for New Zealanders to come together on ceremonial occasions.
Standing here today, I feel proud of the decision to make Pukeahu a reality.
New Zealanders can come here to reflect on our history of involvement in conflicts and the role that has played in shaping our national identity.
They can come here also to honour the hundreds of thousands of New Zealand men and women who have served their country in war and in peace-keeping, those who continue to serve, and the 30,000 who have died in service. 
This is also a place where we can acknowledge our important international relationships.  The Australian Memorial will be dedicated in two days’ time, the first of several memorials which will pay tribute to our relationships with other nations.
The commitment and dedication that has gone into creating this space reflects how strongly everyone involved wanted to ensure that the National War Memorial finally had the setting it deserved.
I am one of those people.  
Creating this park has involved a long period of careful planning and two-and-a-half years of construction – all of which required the co-operation and strong partnerships of a huge number of organisations and groups. I thank them all.
I would like to acknowledge those Parliamentary colleagues, on both sides of the House, who have supported this project from the beginning. 
I also acknowledge Wellington City Council for its significant contribution, including financial support.
In keeping with the original vision, we have created a place imbued with deep significance, which will be meaningful to New Zealanders for many generations to come.
I invite New Zealanders to use the park, and to reflect.
Pukeahu National War Memorial Park will help us honour the pledge that we regularly renew: Lest We Forget. 
Good afternoon.
It’s great to be with you today. I’d like to thank Business New Zealand for hosting this event.
Like all New Zealanders, we have a shared interest in building a strong economy that provides opportunities for Kiwi families and businesses to get ahead here in their own country.
We don’t always agree on everything – and that’s to be expected.
But I do appreciate Business New Zealand’s pragmatic and positive attitude in engaging on important issues affecting businesses, their staff and their families.
I also want to acknowledge the many Wellington business people here today.
It’s good to see the Wellington economy is in good heart and that the business community here is feeling upbeat.
The latest ANZ Regional Trends Survey shows Wellingtonians are confident. And business optimism in the capital is above the national average.
This is translating into more jobs in and around the city at a time when the region is broadening its economic base away from its longstanding reliance on central government.
Many Wellington companies are competing successfully on national and international stages in sectors as diverse as innovation, technology, tourism, film production and niche manufacturing.
I welcome that. A vibrant Wellington business and economic scene is important for New Zealand.
The Government is backing businesses right around New Zealand by ensuring we have competitive policy settings to encourage investment, new jobs and growth.
That’s why I want to focus on the economy today.
A strong, growing economy is how we create higher-paying jobs.
It means wages can increase faster than inflation so New Zealanders are rewarded for their hard work.
And a strong economy allows us to deliver better public services to those who need and rely on them.
There is more to do, but we’re making good progress.
New Zealand economy performing well
In recent weeks we’ve seen the Kiwi dollar come close to parity with the Australian dollar for the first time in around 40 years.
Until quite recently, this would have been unthinkable.
We’ve also seen net migration between New Zealand and Australia shrink from an annual outflow of 36,700 two years ago to just 2,600 in the 12 months to February.
This is the smallest net loss of people to Australia since March 1992 – a combination of fewer New Zealanders leaving and more returning home.
So why are these things happening?
The short answer is because the New Zealand economy is currently doing well.
Last year, we were among the fastest growing developed economies in the world.
We’re doing well both in absolute terms and also relative to countries we like to compare ourselves with – such as Australia.
And the main reason New Zealand is doing well is the positive attitude of New Zealand households and businesses – backed by the Government’s careful and balanced economic programme.
Faced by some significant challenges over recent years, New Zealanders knew what they had to do and they got on with it.
The Government supported them by setting out a clear and consistent policy programme and sticking to it.
Let me give you some examples of our progress.
When we first came into office in late 2008, New Zealand’s economy had been in recession for nearly a year – well before the global financial crisis.
Government spending had climbed 50 per cent in just five years.
The Treasury told us that if we didn’t change course we faced never-ending deficits and net Government debt would exceed 60 per cent of GDP by the early 2020s.
Some forecasters were talking about our unemployment rate coming close to 10 per cent.
Average floating home mortgage rates were nearly 11 per cent and inflation had been above 5 per cent.
Signs of good progress
Now, let’s turn the clock forward six years.
Our economy grew by 3.5 per cent in calendar 2014 – its best performance since September 2007.
Annual core government spending is just 14 per cent higher now than when we came into office six years ago – including the considerable cost of the Canterbury earthquakes.
And although we’ve been holding the purse strings quite tight, we’ve actually improved public services.
We’re approaching surplus and net core Crown debt will peak at less than 27 per cent of GDP before falling.
That’s less than half the 60 per cent of GDP expected by the early 2020s under the previous Government’s settings.
Another 80,000 jobs were created in the past year and the unemployment rate is 5.7 per cent.
While it’s still higher than we would like, it is below Australia’s 6.3 per cent and it’s forecast to fall below 5 per cent in the next couple of years.
And our labour force participation rate - the proportion of the working age population in work or looking for work - is at a record 69.4 per cent.
This is around five percentage points higher than in Australia and another sign of confidence among New Zealanders.
Average floating mortgage rates are now just over 6.5 per cent.
And average weekly wages rose by 2.5 per cent in the past year, comfortably ahead of inflation of less than 1 per cent.
So our strong, growing economy, backed by the Government’s clear economic plan, is translating into real benefits for New Zealand households and businesses.
Creating a confident, better performing economy
However, a few years of good economic growth are not enough.
I sought election as Prime Minister because I believed we had underperformed as a country for many years.
My view was that if we adopted and maintained a consistent programme of sensible economic reform, New Zealand was capable of being one of the world’s best performing economies again.
What we are seeing now are the first signs of that.
We are seeing that if we back our traditionally strong industries and encourage new ones, we can create a confident country that is much better at meeting the aspirations of New Zealanders.
We can become a country of opportunity that will encourage many more of our young people to bring up their families here instead of in Australia or further afield.
And we can do all of this, despite the twin blows of the global financial crisis and the Canterbury earthquakes.
I say we are just seeing the first signs of progress because a couple of good years are not enough to change our long-term wellbeing.
To really improve future prosperity for our children and grandchildren, we need to continue the reforms that have served us well to date.
We need many more years where we grow faster than other developed countries.
And we need to remain wary of the risks and challenges in an uncertain and changing world.
Whether it’s falling global commodity prices, a still fragile Europe, a weaker economic outlook for countries like Australia and China - there is plenty to keep economists awake at nights.
Now is definitely not the time for New Zealand to rest on its laurels.
Relentless focus on competitiveness
So this Government will remain relentlessly focused on improving the competitiveness of our economy.
We will continue to give businesses a platform to invest, grow and create jobs in the knowledge they will be backed by a clear and consistent government policy programme.
We’ll do that by controlling our spending and taking pressure off interest rates and inflation.
We’ll do that by maintaining competitive tax rates and delivering better results from public services.
And we’ll do that by continuing with our wide-ranging reforms under the Business Growth Agenda.
These reforms are all about providing a platform for growth and addressing the choke points of a growing economy.
They are about investing many billions of dollars in necessary public infrastructure like roads and broadband.
They are about providing better and more certain planning rules.
They are about expanding access for our exporters in overseas markets.
They are about encouraging investment right across New Zealand, improving the skills of our people, and encouraging innovation in our businesses.
If we can get these reforms right, I am confident we can continue to outperform other countries well into the future.
Programme’s next steps in Budget 2015
In just over five weeks, Bill English will deliver his seventh Budget.
I’m sure you’ll agree that Bill and his economic team have done a great job in steering New Zealand out of the domestic recession and the global financial crisis.
At the election last year, we received a strong mandate from voters to make further reforms that deliver better results for all New Zealanders.
We’re particularly focused on breaking the cycle of material hardship among families with children – which I’ve made a government priority for this term.
We are already providing significant support in this area.
In Budget 2014, for example, the Government announced a half a billion dollar support package for families and children.
A number of these and other important policies we promised before the election have been, or will soon be, implemented.
For example, from 1 April paid parental leave increased by two weeks to 16 weeks, and it will rise by another two weeks from 1 April next year.
The parental tax credit for lower-income families rose from $150 a week to $220 a week, and the entitlement increased from eight weeks to 10 weeks.
Also from 1 April, the Government’s new HomeStart scheme took effect, which will help around 90,000 Kiwis into their first home over the next five years.
And average ACC levies paid by employers and self-employed people fell to 90 cents per $100 of liable earnings, down from 95 cents.
From 1 July, children under 13 will have access to free GP visits and free prescriptions.
And the average ACC levy for a private motor vehicle will fall by around $130 a year.
So we are delivering on the commitments we made in the run-up to the last election.
They are possible only by us having a strong, growing economy, supported by responsible and predictable government policy.
As I’ve said, our challenge over the next few years is to ensure the economy continues to outperform, year on year.
Two of the most important ways we can achieve sustainable, long-term growth are through innovation and investing in the education of our young people.
The Budget next month will set out further steps in both of these areas. Today I’m pleased to confirm some of those details.
Investing in business innovation
One of the unsung success stories of the last few years has been the resilience of our exporters in the face of a high Kiwi dollar.
Up and down the country, there are hundreds of magnificent stories of smart Kiwi companies taking on and beating the world’s best.
They are in fields as diverse as ICT, high-tech manufacturing, high quality food and beverages, agri-tech and education technology.
Smart, innovative exporters are the key to a prosperous future for New Zealand.
That’s why we’ve made innovation one of the six focus areas in our Business Growth Agenda and we’re backing that with significant extra government investment.
We’ve boosted science and innovation funding significantly since 2008, despite tight financial times.
Government investment in research and development will total $1.5 billion this year – a 70 per cent increase in eight years.
But the really important challenge we have is to increase private sector investment in research and development, where New Zealand continues to lag behind some of the world’s leading economies.
The Government’s main tool for lifting business research and development investment is Callaghan Innovation, and in particular its R&D grants.
They are provided to New Zealand businesses developing world-leading, high-value products, to help stretch their own R & D expenditure further and faster.
The Government has already committed to investing $566 million over four years in co-funding R&D for companies undertaking research and development in New Zealand.
Budget 2015 will confirm the Government will invest another $80 million over four years in encouraging more private sector R&D.
This funding is equivalent to a 14 per cent increase in Callaghan Innovation’s R&D co-funding budget and will get us closer to our overall target for research and development investment.
It will be allocated to a range of qualifying businesses over the next 12 months on an objective independent basis.
Recent recipients of these grants include Rocket Lab, an Auckland-based aerospace company that has developed technology for building rockets to carry satellites into space.
It employs a growing team of highly skilled rocket scientists.
Rocket Lab’s customers include Lockheed Martin, NASA and the US Airforce – all of which need fast, cost-effective methods of getting their payloads into space.
Another grant recipient is Pultron Composites of Gisborne. Its research and development focus is in resin technology and engineering.
Pultron, which employs around 100 FTEs, manufactures well over 100 specialised components and 80 cent of its production is exported.
Its products are used in a wide range of global applications, including sail battens, fishing rods, ski poles, security fencing and electric fencing systems.
These are precisely the kinds of businesses we want to succeed.
And we need more of them.
They create jobs. They build our exports. And they contribute to achieving that stronger New Zealand economy we all want.
Education – a passport to the future
Education is another important area that will receive extra support in the Budget next month.
I know from my own experience that a good education can make a real difference in helping to realise personal potential.
A good education benefits individuals, their families, their communities and the country.
Hekia Parata describes education as a passport to the future. I agree with her.
In the election campaign, we set out a comprehensive programme to provide modern school learning environments that meet the needs of 21st century students.
We’ve invested significantly connecting schools to ultra-fast broadband.
This means New Zealand teachers and students can access the best online resources from anywhere in the world.
We’re building on this by making sure all schools are connected to the Network for Learning – a dedicated nationwide network providing educational content and resources to schools and students.
The Government is also investing heavily in building new schools and modernising classrooms to meet school roll growth and to provide modern learning environments.
Over the past six years, we’ve invested nearly $400 million to build 24 schools around New Zealand to accommodate rising rolls.
These new schools are in addition to the $1.1 billion the Government will invest over 10 years rebuilding and repairing severely damaged schools in the greater Christchurch area, following the earthquakes.
Budget to invest $244 million in schools
Today I can confirm that the Budget next month will provide another $244 million over the next four years to meet growing school rolls and to improve the quality of learning environments.
Four new state schools will be built and these are:
Rototuna Senior High School in Hamilton.
A primary school in Rolleston, near Christchurch.
Two primary schools in Auckland – one at Kumeu and the other at Scott Point.
We will also invest in three new kura kaupapa Māori schools. They will be in Whakatane, Gisborne and Hastings, recognising demand in these areas.
In all, these seven new schools will provide spaces for nearly 4,000 extra students. We expect the first of them to open in 2017.
As part of our package, we will also expand facilities and classrooms at four existing schools: 
Golden Sands School in Papamoa.
Hingaia Peninsula School in Auckland.
Shotover Primary in Queenstown.
and Papamoa College in Papamoa.
In addition, over the next year we will fund an extra 241 classrooms at other schools around New Zealand. Almost half of them will be in Auckland.
This considerable new investment includes the first tranche of the $350 million we promised in the election for new schools and classrooms to meet population growth in and around Auckland.
The money will come from the remaining proceeds of the Government’s share offer programme – channelled through the Future Investment Fund.
This is one part of the next stage of the Government’s significant commitment to provide our young people with the skills we need in a growing, modern economy.
Conclusion
So, just to sum up:
Thanks to the hard work of New Zealanders up and down the country, we’re in a strong position to build on the considerable progress we’ve all made in recent years.
We have a strong and growing economy.
Wages on average are increasing faster than the cost of living.
Businesses are investing in growth and creating tens of thousands of new jobs.
Inflation and interest rates are low.
More New Zealanders are getting off welfare and into work and the crime rate is falling.
And more Kiwis are voting with their feet and either staying home or coming home to secure opportunities for their families.
So we’re in good shape.
But we have to go a long way further to achieve the sort of prosperity that we all want for New Zealand.
The National-led Government has a busy programme ahead.
Providing we stick with that programme, I’m confident we can deliver the opportunities and security New Zealanders and their families deserve.
Thank you.
Mr Speaker, today I am announcing to the House the Government’s decisions about our contribution to the fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, or ISIL.
Last November I gave a national security speech which outlined the threat posed to New Zealand by ISIL.
This brutal group and its distressing methods deserve the strongest condemnation.
ISIL’s ability to motivate Islamist radicals make it a threat not only to stability in the Middle East, but regionally and locally too.
It is well-funded and highly-skilled at using the internet to recruit.
Disturbingly, if anything, ISIL’s brutality has worsened since I gave that speech late last year.
In recent weeks we have witnessed a mass beheading and the horrific plight of a Jordanian pilot being burned alive in a cage.
And we’ve seen stories of Western hostages who have been kidnapped and killed in barbaric ways.
ISIL’s outrageous actions have united an international coalition of 62 countries against the group.
New Zealand is already considered part of the coalition because we have made humanitarian contributions, with $14.5 million in aid provided to the region so far.
The Government has been carefully considering its options to expand our contribution to the international coalition.
As I outlined in November, our approach is one that addresses humanitarian, diplomatic, intelligence and capacity building issues.
Mr Speaker, New Zealand is a country that stands up for its values.
We stand up for what’s right.
We have an obligation to support stability and the rule of law internationally.
We do not shy away from taking our share of the burden when the international rules-based system is threatened.
We have carved out our own independent foreign policy over decades and we take pride in it.
We do what is in New Zealand’s best interests.
It is in that context that I am announcing that the Government has decided to take further steps to help the fight against ISIL.
The Iraqi government has requested support from the international community and has been clear with us that security is its top priority.
We have been clear that we cannot, and should not, fight Iraqis’ battles for them – and actually Iraq doesn’t want us to.
Our military can, however, play a part in building the capability and capacity of the Iraqi forces so they can fight ISIL themselves.
I have been open with New Zealanders that we have been considering an option to train Iraqi Security Forces alongside our longstanding partner Australia, in Iraq.
Such an operation would be behind the wire and limited to training Iraqi Security Forces in order to counter ISIL and legitimately protect innocent people.
Mr Speaker, the Government has decided to deploy a non-combat training mission to Iraq to contribute to the international fight against ISIL.
This is likely to be a joint training mission with Australia, although it will not be a badged ANZAC force.
Their task will be to train Iraqi Security Force units so they are able to commence combat operations, and eventually able to carry on the work of our trainers - creating an independent, self-sustaining military capability for the Government of Iraq to call on.
The mission will involve the deployment of personnel to the Taji Military Complex north of Baghdad, and this is likely to take place in May.
The deployment will be reviewed after nine months and will be for a maximum two-year period.
The total number of personnel deploying is up to 106 in Taji, and there will be others such as staff officers, deploying in coalition headquarters and support facilities in the region.
The total altogether will be up to 143.
As well as these people, further personnel and Air Force assets will occasionally need to be deployed to the region to support the mission – for example in support of personnel rotations and resupply.
Mr Speaker, a training mission like this is not without danger.
It is not a decision we have taken lightly.
I have required assurances that our men and women will be as safe as they can practicably be in Taji.
Our force protection needs have been assessed by NZDF and determined as being able to be met by the well-trained soldiers of our regular Army.
So we will be sending our own force protection to support the training activities.
I want to briefly address the issue of special forces.
As I said last November, I have ruled out sending SAS or any troops into combat roles in Iraq.
The Chief of Defence Force has advised me that special forces are not part of this deployment.
However, I want to be clear that special forces could be deployed for short periods to provide advice on issues like force protection or to help with high profile visits – as they have many times before.
Our deployment in Taji will include logistics and medical support, as well as headquarters staff.
It is our intention that Iraqi Security Forces be able to assume responsibility for delivering their own training programmes in future.
The New Zealand Government will retain ultimate decision-making authority over the nature and scope of the activities of the NZDF personnel within the mission, and those personnel will deploy with appropriate legal protections.
Exactly what form those legal protections take will be worked through in coming weeks with our Iraqi counterparts.
We will secure the best protections we realistically can for our personnel.
Mr Speaker, our military has a proven track record of carrying out this type of training work in Afghanistan.
This is a contribution that’s in line with our values and our skills.
But this is not all we will do to help.
We recognise ISIL is not a short-term threat and there is a lot of work to be done in the long-term.
Defeating ISIL will mean winning the hearts and minds of those vulnerable to its destructive message.
That will take time.
As I said last year, we have already contributed to the humanitarian cause and we are currently examining options to provide more help.
We are also stepping up our diplomatic efforts to counter ISIL and support stability in Iraq.
As part of this, we are looking at options to base a diplomatic representative in Baghdad to serve as a conduit between the Iraqi government and our military deployment, as well as assess how we can support better governance in Iraq.
We will also expand our diplomatic engagement on international counter-terrorism by appointing a new Ambassador for Counter Terrorism.
Underpinning all this, we will work as a member of the UN Security Council to advocate for effective action on ISIL.
Mr Speaker, last November I told New Zealanders ISIL had been successful in recruiting New Zealanders to its cause.
Our Government agencies have a watch list of between 35 and 40 people of concern in the foreign fighter context and that remains the case.
Unfortunately an additional group requiring further investigation is growing in number.
We have strengthened the ability of our intelligence agencies to deal with this and they are taking steps to add to their resources.
We cannot be complacent, as events in Sydney, Paris and Ottawa have underscored.
To those who argue that we should not take action because it raises that threat, I say this:  the risk associated with ISIL becoming stronger and more widespread far outweighs that.
I know there is already risk.
New Zealanders do too, because they know we are a nation of prolific travellers who have been caught up in terrorist activity around the world many times before.
Mr Speaker, the Government has carefully considered our contribution to the international campaign against ISIL.
We are prepared to step up to help.
New Zealand does not take its commitment to Iraq lightly.
In return we expect that the Iraqi government will make good on its commitment to an inclusive government that treats all Iraqi citizens with respect.
Sending our forces to Iraq is not an easy decision but it is the right decision.
They will go with our best wishes.
Thank you.
Rau rangatira ma e huihui nei,
Nau mai, haere mai ki Waitangi.
Tēnei aku mihi māhana mo te Kāwanatanga Nāhinara ki a koutou.
Kia ora huihui tātou katoa.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
Today we commemorate 175 years of the Treaty of Waitangi relationship. 
It’s a relationship we should all have pride in. And we should all have great confidence that it will continue to strengthen.
Like the first Maori who arrived here many hundreds of years ago, European settlers arrived by sea.
They must have had a sense of adventure. Like the first Maori navigators they braved the often ill-tempered Pacific Ocean to strike out from their homes and make landfall here.
The whalers, the sailors, the men and women who came here to till the land and take their chances – they would have had many reasons for leaving their homes in the Northern Hemisphere. Homes many of them would never see again.
But I bet they were united by a common thread of hope and optimism.
Hope for a better life than the one they had left behind.
And hope for a new society and new opportunities for themselves and their children.
Those who signed the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840 began forging the bonds of the special partnership we share today.
Over time, those bonds have been tested.
The spirit of generosity with which Māori entered into this partnership was forgotten or ignored by many over the following decades.
But the Treaty partnership we commemorate today acknowledges the bonds that have underpinned the creation of a special country.
175 years.  Just think about what we have achieved in that time. The great scientists, adventurers, sports men and women, pioneers and dreamers who call themselves New Zealanders.
The first person to split the atom, the first women voters, the first conqueror of Everest.
The first Rugby World Cup winners.
The artists, writers, singers and musicians, actors and directors who not only entertain us, but who have also created a body of stories and songs which could have only been made in New Zealand.
And the leaders, Maori and Pakeha alike, who have developed a Treaty partnership which is admired around the world.
That’s a lot to be proud of.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
Waitangi Day is a day to remember and to understand the very many pieces that make up our country’s history. The high points, the low points, the triumphs, the mistakes and the unexpected successes.
And it’s also a day to look beyond the horizon and to our future.
I am sure the Treaty signatories here at Waitangi felt the same.
The missionaries, sailors, traders and Maori – watched over by police on horseback who were sent from Sydney – packed the Treaty grounds on the 5th of February 1840.
They mingled with people hawking cold roasts, pork and bread, and rum-sellers, and the bay was a flotilla of canoes and ships with flags flying.
The delegation of Māori was so large that five tonnes of potatoes and 30 pigs were brought in, so guests were properly fed.
The next day, the 6th, was meant to be a rest day.
But, after coming ashore that morning, Britain’s consul, Captain William Hobson, was surprised to find several hundred Maori wanting to continue discussions.
They met under the marquee, made of stitched-together sailcloth, surrounded by a handful of Europeans.
By the end of the day’s discussion, around 40 Maori leaders had signed the Treaty.
To each of those leaders, Captain Hobson said, “he iwi tahi tatou” – we are one people.
Māori and the British representatives signed the Treaty of Waitangi in good faith.
And the generosity of Maori, and the good faith of both people, has led to the New Zealand we know today, and to the relationship we share.
We have some of the best legacies of Britain: a stable democracy, an elected Parliament, an independent judiciary and a free press.
And we have a culture infused with the customs, knowledge and tikanga of the tangata whenua.
We welcome people from all parts of the world who want to make New Zealand their home, because they want to be part of the nation we have created.
The Treaty is a formal agreement but it must be interpreted over time, and adapt to new situations, through negotiation between the Treaty partners.
Many issues have a long and nuanced history, lived through by many people from all walks of life.
There are still things to work through.
But I am confident that when we celebrate the bicentenary of the Treaty signing in 2040, we will look back to today and be proud of what we have achieved since.
That’s 25 years away.
The last big Treaty commemoration was in 1990 – 25 years ago.
Those 25 years have passed quickly. It seems like too short a time for anything in New Zealand to have changed much at all.
But in 1990 things were different.
New Zealand, for example, was governed under First Past the Post.
The Maori Party didn’t exist.
Now, it’s difficult to imagine Parliament without them.
The Maori Party has brought a rich dimension to this Government since 2008.
It’s one of the reasons why the Crown and Maori have come so far over the past six years.
One area we are working on together is reforming Te Ture Whenua Māori Act. It’s the most significant re-writing of this legislation in more than a century.
How best to develop Maori land, with its multiple owners, has vexed lawmakers for over 100 years.
We recognise that challenge, because it’s central to Maori economic development.
If we can make this land work for Maori, then it will add up to $8 billion to the economy and create at least 4000 new jobs over the next decade.
25 years ago, not one iwi had achieved a Treaty settlement.
That was still five years into the future.
The Crown has now signed 72 deeds of settlement – 46 of those in the past six years.
All willing and able iwi are engaged with the Crown.
Those settled iwi are creating success stories. They see the post-settlement environment as their chance to shape their own destiny.
Settlements may represent a fraction of what was actually lost. But they let iwi move on and make better futures, and create more opportunities, for their people.
New Zealand as a whole is better off for that.
My Treaty Negotiations Minister, Chris Finlayson, is unable to be here today.
But I know if he were here, he would reiterate to you his belief that by 2017, all willing iwi should be settled.
There have been other positive changes since 1990.
Education is one example.
In 1990, just over 3000 Maori school leavers achieved 6th Form Certificate. In 2013, 7500 Māori school leavers achieved NCEA Level 2 or higher.  Taken as a proportion of Māori school leavers, that’s a 20 per cent improvement.
The achievement rate among all school leavers is also rising, but among young Māori that improvement is happening at a faster rate.
Lifting the level of achievement in education among young New Zealanders is important, but it’s especially vital for young Maori who, for too long, have not achieved at the same level as non-Maori.
Yes, there certainly are challenges to educational achievement and we do have a long way to go to eliminate that disparity - but progress is evident.
A better education means equality of opportunity for New Zealanders, regardless of their background.
Time and time again, we see the evidence that success at school means better, higher-paying jobs, a greater standard of living and more opportunities.
Another area is health.
In the early 1990s around 50 per cent of Maori regularly smoked. Today it’s about 32 per cent.
That’s due in no small part to Tariana Turia, who has been passionate in her work to cut smoking rates among Māori.
Now, Maori are living longer – around six more years than in 1990. Immunisation rates among Maori children are up and infant mortality rates have fallen.
So in 25 years, many gains have been made. We can do even better over the next 25 years, too.
It’s all too easy to focus on the negatives at the expense of the many positives.
The Treaty settlement process may not be to everyone’s satisfaction.
But I’m a firm believer in the current process, which is addressing the wrongs done in the past to help Maori build their futures.
And on the world stage, it’s acknowledged as one of the best examples of efforts to address historical grievances.
I also think we’re maturing together, as a nation.
Nowadays, almost every time people sing God Defend New Zealand – at a school, at a sports match or a formal ceremony – we sing it in both Māori and English.
It wasn’t always that way – only in the past 15 years has it become widespread.
New Zealanders just started doing it, because it felt right.
It feels like the right kind of representation of who we are as a nation.
It’s the type of understated change that appears small, but one I think speaks volumes about how we have grown.
So in 25 years’ time, when New Zealand celebrates 200 years of nationhood, there are some changes I’d like to see.
In 2040, every willing and able iwi will be settled.
In 2040, all Māori owned land will be far better utilised, delivering jobs and prosperity, particularly for those in regional areas.
And in 2040, I want to see the disparity in educational achievement eliminated.
For young Māori, this means really digging in to lift achievement.
For the Government, it means ensuring our education system works for all students. It also means developing initiatives to support young people and families in other areas.
Like free doctors’ visits for under-13s.
Like subsidising early childhood education.
And getting our schools, social organisations and law enforcement agencies to work together so children don’t stumble into a life of petty crime or welfare dependency.
Governments can’t make these changes by themselves.
We also need to get alongside families and give them the right support. It’s not just about throwing money at a problem.
Because you can’t buy the dedication of communities who want to rid their streets of drugs and crime.
And you can’t buy the dedication of a mother who is trying to keep her 14-year-old son in school.
When you give families what they actually need, great changes can happen.
Māori children, for example, are now being immunised at nearly double the rate they were in 2007. So I’ve no doubt the willingness – and the ability – to chase success in education is there, with the right support.
So that’s what I would like to see in 2040. There is one more aspect of New Zealand I would like to see changed.
In 2040, I’d like to see a new New Zealand flag raised at the Waitangi Day dawn service.
That’s my personal preference.
The current flag represents the thinking by and about a young country moving from the 1800s to the 1900s. Our role in the world was very different then.  Our relationship to the rest of the world has changed over time.
I think, and I believe many New Zealanders feel the same, that the flag captures a colonial and post-colonial era whose time has passed.
During this parliamentary term, New Zealanders will be asked to participate in a two-step referendum process to choose an alternative flag, and decide whether or not that flag should replace the current one.
I believe the time is right for us to create a flag which is distinctly New Zealand’s.
At the same time, I acknowledge there may be many New Zealanders who want to retain the existing flag, and that will be one option.
Regardless of your view, this milestone year in our history is a good time to discuss the flag, formally and respectfully, allowing New Zealanders to have their say.
Māori chose New Zealand’s first flag – known today as the flag of the United Tribes - in 1834, when James Busby, the British Resident, decided chiefs needed to choose a flag that New Zealand’s ships could fly.
Three flags were displayed on short poles at Waitangi, voted on, and the winning one hoisted.
I imagine it was all over in a matter of minutes. The process this time around will be much more considered, but I have every expectation Māori will be closely involved, just as they were in 1834.
If we choose a new flag, it will serve us in times of celebration and remembrance, like Waitangi Day.
On Waitangi Day we remember when our nation-building began, and we celebrate the hope and optimism our forebears must have felt when they oversaw the creation of a new country.
It’s a day when we draw confidence for our future from the sense of our past.
In 175 years, New Zealand has achieved much. In the 25 years since the 150thanniversary of the signing of the Treaty, some of those achievements, like the settlement process itself, have brought about great change.
I am confident the next 25 years will deliver more promises, passion and achievements as we work together to tackle the challenges that will be thrown at us.
Thank you.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
New Zealand is in good shape and getting better.
We are making great strides towards building a stronger, more prosperous country – a country where we can have a great lifestyle and earn a good income that compares well with the rest of the world.
That progress is due to the hard work and positive attitude of New Zealanders.
It’s also because of the stability, cohesion and confidence that’s come from six years of strong and stable government.
New Zealand is doing well compared to other countries.
The economy is growing, employment is increasing and wages are rising.
Consumers are benefiting from low inflation and a long period of stable, low interest rates.
We are growing new industries like ICT and high tech manufacturing, and strengthening existing ones like our food industry, tourism and international education.
The Government is working towards a surplus and repaying debt.
We’re making good progress in areas like welfare, education and law and order, to help improve the lives of New Zealanders and their families.
New Zealanders endorsed our approach four months ago by re-electing the Government with an even stronger mandate.
I thank them for the confidence they’ve shown in us.
The election result allows New Zealand to experience a different third term government than has been the case in the past.
We have a mandate and a strong platform to achieve further steady reform that delivers better results for New Zealanders. 
And there is much to do.
I can tell you that there will be no slackening in pace.
We have three busy years ahead of us.
We must also manage the many global risks and challenges that could throw New Zealand off track.
That was reinforced for me at the World Economic Forum in Davos, which I’ve just attended.
Europe's debt issues are far from resolved, growth is slowing in China and global prices for many commodities remain weak.
These, and other factors, make it all the more important to continue improving our economy, boosting our competitiveness and encouraging new investment, so we build a stronger and more resilient New Zealand.
The Government’s focus this term will be on our four priorities:
responsibly managing the Government’s finances
building a more productive and competitive economy
delivering better public services
and continuing to support the rebuilding of Christchurch.
I want to talk to you today about housing, which is an important part of all these four priorities.
After the election, I appointed three Ministers to housing-related portfolios.
Paula Bennett is the Minister for Social Housing, in charge of supporting New Zealanders with the highest housing needs.
Bill English is the Minister responsible for Housing New Zealand, which owns or leases 68,000 properties.
And Nick Smith is the Minister for Building and Housing.
So you can see that housing policy is important to this Government.
One of the biggest and most longstanding issues is the supply of new housing, particularly in Auckland.
Previous governments have put this in the too-hard basket.
We’re actually doing something about it.
We’re taking steps that will result in more houses being built, and more affordable homes in the market.
We’ve passed new legislation and signed housing accords with six councils, including Auckland, to fast-track new housing and release more land for residential development.
Last week, Nick Smith outlined significant changes to the Resource Management Act to improve the supply and affordability of housing.
Already you can see signs that our approach is working.
Residential construction increased 21 per cent last year and more than 24,000 building consents were issued – the highest number since 2008.
This growth in construction is set to continue as special housing areas accelerate land availability and consenting.
That will help to ease the pressure on house prices.
But we should also recognise that housing affordability includes more than just prices.
Incomes have been rising faster than inflation and people are feeling confident about the future.
Interest rates are low, which makes servicing a mortgage easier.
These factors are actually supporting the growth in house prices in some areas. People are assessing their own ability to pay and are bidding on that basis, as they’ve always done.
It’s often hard, though, to save for your first house.
That’s where the Government’s new HomeStart programme for first home buyers comes in.
It begins in April this year and we estimate it will help 90,000 people into their first home over the next five years.
On top of that, we’re improving the quality of New Zealand’s housing stock.
Nearly 300,000 homes around the country are warmer, drier and healthier thanks to our Warm Up insulation and heating programme, and the insulation of Housing New Zealand properties.
For people on low incomes, the Government subsidises housing costs from a total budget of $1.9 billion this year.
Around $1.2 billion of that is for the accommodation supplement, which helps people with the costs of private rentals and sometimes mortgage payments.
The other $700 million is for the income-related rent subsidy, which supports low-income people with the greatest housing needs, in what’s known as social housing.
People in social housing are those whose circumstances and finances make private renting or home ownership difficult.
They could be a sole parent, for example, an older person, or someone with mental health issues.
Often, they are receiving other assistance, like a benefit or disability support.
This issue – social housing – is what I want to talk to you about today.
Until last year, to get the most intensive housing assistance from the Government, which is an income-related rent, you had to live in a Housing New Zealand property – a state house, as they are commonly called.
But that’s not the case anymore.
Now, the Government will also support people with high housing needs if they are living in a property run by an approved community housing provider, and if they’ve been referred there by the Ministry of Social Development.
The financial support they get is exactly the same as it is for people in Housing New Zealand properties. They pay an income-related rent – usually 25 per cent of their income – with the Government paying the difference between that and the property’s market rent.
This change took effect last April.
It’s why we talk about “social housing” rather than “state housing”, because you no longer have to live in a state house to get a high level of government housing support.
It’s an important change.
Community housing providers already own around 5,000 houses and some are long established.
There’s a lot of potential there.
Locally-based providers can be closer and more responsive to their community.
Providers that focus on particular types of tenants can integrate housing with the other services they provide, like mental health, disability or budgeting support.
Non-government housing providers can also bring in new approaches and access new sources of funding.
I’ll give you a nice example.
The Dominion Post had a story last month about Paula Bennett opening new housing units in Wellington for people with disabilities.
There’s a lovely photo of Paula and one of the tenants – Daniel – sharing a joke.
He’s obviously delighted to be moving into one of eight brand new and specially designed units that are owned by Accessible Properties, a community housing provider.
It bought the units with help from the Government’s Social Housing Fund, which we established in 2011.
Its tenancy managers specialise in working with people with disabilities.
Some of the tenants are getting the income-related rent subsidy.
And quite apart from the social housing side of the development, there are also 10 other new units on the site that are available for sale into the general market.
As the article says, this is the changing face of social housing in New Zealand.
It’s not change for the sake of it. It’s change to improve the circumstances of those who need the most help.
And it’s part of our wider approach to delivering better services to New Zealanders who need them.
Currently, only a small number of social housing tenants are in properties run by an approved community housing provider.
We want that number to grow over the next few years.
We want a better range of social housing options for people in need.
At the same time, we want Housing New Zealand to be doing the best job it can.
It will continue to be by far the biggest provider of social housing in New Zealand.
But the experience of countries like Australia and the United Kingdom is that having non-government organisations involved in social housing, alongside the government, is a better way of doing things.
That’s just one part of the Government’s overall package of social housing reforms, which has five objectives.
The first objective is to ensure that people who need housing support from the Government can get it.
We are going to ensure that more people get into social housing over the next three years, whether that is run by Housing New Zealand or a community provider.
The social housing budget provides for around 62,000 income-related rent subsidies a year.
We are committed to increasing that to around 65,000 subsidies by 2017/18, which will cost an extra $40 million a year.
In particular, there will be an increase in social housing in Auckland and increase in Christchurch.
In Auckland, as part of this growth in social housing, an initial 300 income-related rent subsidies will shortly be offered to community housing providers.
We’re also concerned about people sleeping rough or in substandard accommodation.
Paula Bennett has given MSD a big programme of work to reduce pressure on organisations working with homeless people and to reduce the number of people waiting on the social housing register.
This includes a $500,000 cash injection for the emergency housing sector, a wider review of funding and the introduction of an emergency housing database in Auckland.
MSD will work more intensively with people on the social housing register who have less urgent needs, to help them into private rentals where possible.
And by increasing the number of social housing places, getting a better alignment of houses with demand, and freeing up houses occupied by market renters, we’ll help more vulnerable New Zealanders into better housing.
Our second objective is to help social housing tenants to independence, as appropriate.
We want to help people to move out of social housing and into private rentals or home ownership, if and when their circumstances improve.
Currently, around 3,300 tenants are living in Housing New Zealand properties but are earning too much to get an income-related rent subsidy. These market renters could in many cases go into private accommodation.
The Government has decided that an additional 3,000 tenancy reviews will begin over this year and the next, focusing on market renters and those who are close to paying market rents.   
This will take the total number of reviews to almost 5,000 over this two-year period.
People will be encouraged and supported to move into other housing if they are in a position to take that step.
That frees up a place for someone else with greater needs.
I can assure people that every review will take into account people’s individual circumstances and the availability of alternative accommodation.  We understand the importance of certainty for tenants, particularly those with serious and long-term needs.
The third objective in this reform programme is to ensure that properties used for social housing are the right size and configuration, and in the right areas.
Around a third of Housing New Zealand properties are in the wrong place, or are the wrong type to meet existing and future demand.
Thirty per cent of people waiting for social housing require a one bedroom place, for example, but these make up only nine per cent of Housing New Zealand properties.
More houses are required in the bigger cities – Auckland in particular – and fewer in some other parts of the country.
And many state houses are showing their age.
Housing New Zealand is already working on its portfolio of properties – disposing of houses that are no longer required, or in the wrong place, and building new ones where they are needed.
We want to accelerate that process, to get the location and size of Housing New Zealand properties lined up with the people who need them.
The Government has decided to commission a strategic review of Housing New Zealand in the first half of this year.
Its asset management plans will be part of this review so we can ensure its properties are right for tenants, given Housing New Zealand’s ongoing role as the biggest social landlord in the country.
We’ll give more details when the strategic review is completed.
Our fourth objective is to help increase the supply of affordable housing for people to buy, especially in Auckland.
How we manage social housing can help with that.
Housing New Zealand is the biggest residential landowner in the country and could free up more land for housing development.
Housing New Zealand owns neighbouring sections, for example, where a few existing properties could be replaced with a lot more new homes, with some or all of them remaining as social housing.
On a larger scale, there are opportunities to redevelop and revitalise whole state housing suburbs. These redevelopments could result in a mix of Housing New Zealand properties, other social housing, affordable housing and higher cost homes.
Large and small redevelopments are already happening.
In Auckland, for example, the Tamaki Redevelopment Company – a partnership between the Government and Auckland Council – is rejuvenating the suburb. It’s delivering new social housing alongside affordable housing and other homes as a major urban renewal project.
Again, we want to accelerate these processes, so small and large redevelopments of Housing New Zealand land and properties are undertaken with more urgency.
The Government is still considering how and where that might happen.
A large redevelopment could involve existing properties being transferred out of Housing New Zealand ownership and into a special urban development entity.
But I want to emphasise again that the total number of social housing places across Auckland will increase as a result of what we are doing.
And existing tenants will be supported through any changes.
Our fifth and final objective is to encourage and develop more diverse ownership of social housing.
To some extent we can do that by involving community housing providers in redevelopments of Crown land.
However, the overwhelming dominance of Housing New Zealand leaves little room at the moment for non-government organisations to play a significant role.
But we can change that if community housing providers take ownership or management of some existing Housing New Zealand properties, with tenants remaining in them.
The Government is prepared to do that if we’re satisfied we can get better services for tenants and fair and reasonable value for taxpayers.
We’ll look at doing that in areas where demand is stable and where housing providers are keen to expand.
These areas will be determined after engagement and consultation, including with community housing providers and iwi, to ensure we understand everyone’s rights and interests.
We’ll then look to sell between 1,000 and 2,000 Housing New Zealand properties over the following year for use as social housing run by approved community housing providers.
In doing so, we’ll use open and competitive processes.
Community housing providers may want to buy properties on their own, or they may go into partnership with other organisations who lend them money, contribute equity, or provide other services.
Properties will have to stay in social housing unless the government agrees otherwise, and existing tenants will continue to be housed for the duration of their need.
Selling properties in this way doesn’t reduce the number of social housing places. It just means more of the tenancies will be managed by a non-government housing provider rather than Housing New Zealand.
We’re very conscious that the sale of properties has to work for taxpayers.
We’re looking to get a fair and reasonable price for these properties, bearing in mind they’re being sold as ongoing social houses with high-need tenants.
We’re not selling them as private homes or rentals.
So we might not get the book value of the properties. But that’s only because, under accounting rules, the value of houses in the Government’s books is based on a theoretical sale in the open market. And that’s not what we’re doing.
All going well, we might initiate more sales over the next three years, but that has yet to be decided.
Cabinet will review progress in November, and any further steps will be announced after that.
Property sales and large redevelopments will reduce the size of Housing New Zealand’s portfolio.
But it will continue to be by far the biggest provider of social housing in New Zealand, and we will ensure that in 2017 it provides at least 60,000 properties.
It may have more than that, depending on how quickly transactions and redevelopments proceed.
Initially, we will free up capital from these sales, which we’ll use for housing and other capital projects needed across government.
But we’ll be spending more each year on income-related rent subsidies.
In summary, the package I’ve outlined today will help more people and families get social housing, ensure more of that housing is supplied by community housing providers, improve services for social housing tenants and release more land for new houses.
Of course, our opponents will say that the Government should own and run everything in social housing.
But that system didn’t work as well as it could for tenants, or for taxpayers.
If we’re to succeed in solving some of New Zealand’s longstanding social challenges, the Government needs to be open to working with community groups, non-government agencies and the private sector.
We don’t have a monopoly on good ideas, resources and expertise.
So we’re taking a different approach to provide quality social housing for New Zealanders who need it.
It’s just one of the many areas where the Government will be working hard for New Zealanders over the next three years.
Our economic programme is laying the foundations for a stronger economy, sustainable jobs and higher incomes.
And we’re making real progress in delivering better public services for New Zealanders.
That takes constant hard work, oversight and judgement.
It takes a team working together and all heading in the same direction.
And it takes a government that is united, focused and energised.
That’s what I can promise New Zealand.
Thank you.
Ministerial colleagues.
Members of the diplomatic community.
Distinguished guests, members of the Institute, ladies and gentlemen.
As Prime Minister I have overarching responsibility for New Zealand’s national security.
That covers a wide range of threats and risks, from earthquakes to espionage, and cyber-attacks to conflicts between states.
It’s about protecting our way of life and the values that shape our society.
The Government takes its national security obligations very seriously.
We have an obligation to ensure New Zealanders are safe at home or abroad.
We have an obligation to maintain the integrity of our democratic system, our institutions, and the systems and processes of government.
We have an obligation to secure our sea, air and electronic lines of transport and communication into and out of New Zealand. We decide who comes here and on what conditions, and we decide who can make use of our resources.
We have an obligation to support stability in our region – in the Pacific, the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean.
And we have an obligation to support stability and the rule of law internationally.
New Zealand is known for its integrity, reliability and independence, and I’m very grateful for the endorsement we received from the international community in our recent election to the United Nations Security Council.
Given the nature of national security, I don’t give many speeches about it.
But I want to talk to you today – and to New Zealanders – about how our risk and threat profile is changing, the challenges we face, and how the Government is responding to them.
Much of that is due to the rapid rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, or ISIL.
Over the last two years the Sunni extremist group has seized substantial territory in northern Iraq and northern Syria.
It claims to be the leader of the entire Muslim world and has decreed borders between Islamic countries to be invalid.
New Zealanders will have seen the brutal and distressing methods ISIL uses, including beheading displays and mass killings. These deserve the strongest condemnation.
ISIL’s ability to motivate Islamist radicals, as well as its growth, ambition, resources and methods, make it a brutal threat, not only to stability in the Middle East, but regionally and locally too.
ISIL is well-funded and highly-skilled at using the internet to propagate extremist material and gain recruits.
It has amassed financial resources by seizing banks and oil resources, effectively taxing controlled areas, kidnapping for ransom, and drawing upon an international financing network.
It is widely regarded as the richest terrorist entity in history.
It is estimated ISIL has around 12,000 to 15,000 foreign terrorist fighters, of which as many as 3,000 hold Western passports from a range of countries.
The rise of such a well-resourced, globally-focused terrorist entity, highly skilled in recruitment techniques utilising social media, is a game changer for New Zealand.
I don’t want to overstate the risks, but they are real and we should not shy away from acknowledging the facts.
ISIL exposes us to a type of threat that we lack both the legislative tools and resources to combat.
We need to have both a short-term strategy, designed to deal with the immediate threat to our national security, and a longer-term strategy, designed to deal with the root causes of extremism.
Today I intend to outline, as clinically and clearly as I can, the nature of the immediate threat to national security.
As in other Western countries, ISIL has been successful in recruiting New Zealanders to its cause.
Government agencies have a watch list of between 30 and 40 people of concern in the foreign fighter context.
These are people in or from New Zealand who are, in various ways, participating in extremist behaviour.
Some of those on the watch list have travelled to Syria to engage in fighting and remain there.
Others are ISIL supporters who have tried to travel to Syria or Iraq to fight, and who have been prevented from leaving by cancellation of their passports.
Some are people involved in funding terrorism, people who are trying to radicalise others, and people who themselves are becoming radicalised and interested in fighting for ISIL.
While you will appreciate the limited nature of what I can say, it is important to note that there are individuals here who are attracted to carrying out domestic attacks of the type we have seen prevented in Australia and recently take place in Canada.
Our agencies do everything in their powers to prevent that happening here and to keep New Zealanders safe.
I want to stress that none of these people are representative of the New Zealand Muslim community as a whole.
The Muslim community is a peaceful one which makes a valuable contribution to New Zealand.
I know the vast majority of Muslim New Zealanders are as distressed by the actions of ISIL and its violent extremist message as anyone.
As a Government we are doing what we can to prevent New Zealanders going off to fight for ISIL and brutally killing innocent civilians in Iraq and Syria.
Some may ask why we cancel their passports and prevent them travelling rather than just letting them go.
But I think most New Zealanders understand that we do not want to have a reputation for exporting foreign terrorist fighters to places which already have more than enough of them.
And there is a UN Security Council resolution on taking action against such people which New Zealand is required to comply with.
Should they return to New Zealand fully radicalised and skilled in fighting, they would represent a significant threat to the safety of New Zealanders.
So we have been cancelling people’s passports where necessary.
But even those radicalised New Zealanders who have been prevented from travelling are a distinct threat to our safety and security.
People who are prevented from performing terrorist acts abroad can turn their minds to terrorist acts at home, as the people of Canada experienced in recent weeks.
In addition to those on the watch list, there are another 30 to 40 on a list of people requiring further investigation.
These people could well be added to the watch list or even given a clean bill of health. We will not know until those investigations can be properly carried out.
Recently, officials took the decision to raise our national threat level from Very Low to Low.
That means that while previously the threat of a terrorist attack was assessed as unlikely, it is now assessed as possible but not expected.
The threat level is still below our partner countries, although from time to time we see specific threats emerge that we deal with on a case-by-case basis.
I want to assure New Zealanders that our agencies are doing everything they can to monitor the potential threat posed by radicalised individuals.
But as Prime Minister, and Minister for National Security and Intelligence, I would not be doing my job if I didn’t ask whether there was more we could do to address this risk.
My Government will ensure the agencies have the resources and tools they need to do this work.
Shortly after the election, I established an urgent review of legislative settings in relation to foreign fighters.
It was narrow and tightly focused, looking only at measures that can add to the safety and security of New Zealand in the short term.
A more comprehensive review of legislative settings will occur in a broader intelligence review that is required under law to begin by the middle of next year.
Today I can announce that the Cabinet has signed off on a series of proposals for law changes in the short-term – ones that cannot wait for the longer review due to the rapidly evolving environment.
I intend to seek broad political support to pass very limited legislation in a responsible way.
First, it is my intention to give the Minister of Internal Affairs the ability to cancel a passport on the grounds of national security for up to three years.
At the moment, he or she can only do that for up to one year.
There will be safeguards built into the extended period, including a periodic review every 12 months which the person involved will be able to submit to.
As is the case now, the person would retain the ability to appeal or seek a judicial review of the Minister’s decision.
It is my expectation that applications for the cancellation of a passport for a period of longer than a year would be rare.
Second, I intend to allow the Minister of Internal Affairs to suspend a passport or travel document for a temporary period of no more than 10 working days.
This power would be used in circumstances where urgent action is required but time is not available to prepare a full package of information to support a cancellation.
It would allow agencies to take action to prevent foreign fighters from travelling should information come to light late in their planning phase.
The passport suspension would allow time for a full cancellation process to follow.
Third, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service will be given a funding injection of almost $7 million across the current and next financial year to increase the number of staff it has available to work on monitoring and investigating foreign terrorist fighters.
As I noted earlier, while we know of between 30 and 40 individuals who are on the watch list, there is also another group of people who require further investigation.
The funding injection for the SIS will allow it to continue to focus on the highest risk individuals but also strengthen its understanding of the potential threat posed by others.
Finally, I also want to update one particular aspect of the SIS’s surveillance powers, in relation to video surveillance.
It may surprise some people to hear that the SIS cannot generally undertake visual surveillance in a private setting or which would involve trespass onto private property.
This means, for example, that the SIS cannot install a video camera in a private premise even if it was for the purpose of observing activities of security concern, like people training with weapons.
This issue was dealt with on the Police’s behalf in the Search and Surveillance Act in 2012.
I am proposing that the SIS be given the power under warrant, modelled on the existing Search and Surveillance Act.
I am also proposing that the SIS be given an emergency surveillance power for a period not exceeding 48 hours, where it could, at the direction of its Director and subject to the Inspector General’s oversight, conduct urgent surveillance before a warrant can be issued.
This would allow the Service to investigate urgent situations while paperwork is prepared for the full warrant process.
In order to use this power, the Director will have to be satisfied that the threshold for issuing a warrant would be met. I also expect the SIS to report publicly on an annual basis how many times it has used this power.
There are further technical changes I am proposing, but these are the five main outcomes of the review.
These changes will strengthen our national security settings and I trust other political parties will recognise them as responsible and narrow. They will also be subject to a sunset clause.
So that is the first response I want to talk about today – the package of short term legislative and funding measures.
The second response to ISIL is New Zealand’s contribution to the international coalition opposing that terrorist entity.
We have discussed the threat of ISIL with many countries in the Middle East and elsewhere, including with our Five Eyes partners, and that has provided a base for our decision-making.
So I want to address that Five Eyes relationship briefly.
Our partnership with Five Eyes started in World War II and since then has provided New Zealand with global information and reach on international security and intelligence issues that we could never have achieved on our own.
The information and support of our Five Eyes partners will be an important part of how we deal with the threat of ISIL at home and abroad.
But I can be completely clear: Five Eyes does not cost us our independence.
We have carved out our own independent foreign policy over decades now.
We take pride in our independent foreign policy.
As a small trading nation, our prosperity depends on the international rules-based system.
We do not shy away from taking our share of the burden when that system is threatened, but we make independent decisions that suit our principles, role and size.
That is what shaped our contributions in places like Afghanistan and Timor Leste, and we will also take an independent, New Zealand approach to any decisions we make about ISIL.
There are four areas where New Zealand is preparing to make a contribution to the coalition against ISIL.
The first area that we are looking at carefully is intelligence.
To manage a threat like this we need to be well informed and share information with our partners.
This is exactly what our intelligence agencies are for. We will be stepping up our contribution to intelligence operations that offer opportunities to further understand and potentially disrupt ISIL.
And we will build our capability to monitor threats from any offshoots of ISIL that threaten us at home.
I’m not going to go into the details of that intelligence response.
The second area I want to address is diplomatic.
ISIL is not a short-term threat – there is a lot of work to be done and it is a long game.
Defeating ISIL will mean winning the hearts and minds of those vulnerable to its destructive message.
New Zealand as a good international citizen, and as a country now elected to serve on the UN Security Council, needs to play its part in ensuring that the longstanding and some would say intractable problems of the Middle East are addressed.
There is little doubt that lack of movement towards a two-state solution in relation to Palestine, and the recent high number of civilian casualties in Gaza, serve to make the task of recruiters to extremist causes a significantly easier one.
The unresolved issue of Iran’s nuclear capabilities hangs over the region as well.
We also need to redouble efforts towards reaching a political solution to the violent stalemate in Syria. This has been another cause of ISIL’s rise, and has seen almost 200,000 killed, and led to more than 3 million Syrians fleeing their country.  
Over the next two years we have the opportunity to attempt to ensure that the United Nations Security Council, designed to address these major issues of stability and security, lifts its game.
In our region too there is an opportunity for greater diplomatic effort, including working with our close friends and neighbours in Indonesia, Malaysia and others in the region, which have Muslim populations that are targets for extremist recruiters.
They too are looking for ways of dealing with this threat.
We have already taken steps to lift our diplomatic efforts with these neighbours, and to play our part in a more focused regional counterterrorism effort. We will continue that work.
Thirdly, I want to address humanitarian assistance. We must not lose sight of what is happening now on the ground.
The situations in Syria and Iraq are humanitarian emergencies at the most extreme scale with millions of people displaced by conflict.
New Zealand has provided $13.5 million in aid to the region since the start of the Syria crisis in 2011 and I am pleased to announce a further $1 million contribution today towards the needs of refugees and the internally displaced.
We will be looking at further assistance to meet the needs of Syrian and Iraqi refugees fleeing their countries.
Finally, there is the question of whether New Zealand is prepared to play its part in the capacity-building that is clearly required if Iraq is to have a future as a law-abiding democratic country that treats all of its citizens with respect.
In this regard we need to remember that the seeds of ISIL’s success lie in the failure of the Maliki regime to adhere to acceptable standards of governance, and to treat all citizens, regardless of ethnicity or religion, with respect.
It would, in my view, be highly unrealistic for us to expect those features to dramatically improve under the al-Abadi government without significant international support.
And it would be unreasonable for New Zealand to expect that international support to be provided without our country being prepared to play our modest part.
Quite what this means in relation to the development of good institutions – better Police, Courts, Parliamentary process and the like – will only become clear later.
But I believe we should signal a general willingness to play a part.
In relation to the more immediate task of assisting in building a disciplined and efficient military to maintain peace and security, we have a more complex decision to make.
While building a modern Iraqi military is clearly important, New Zealand cannot, and should not, fight Iraqis’ battles for them.
So today I am ruling out New Zealand sending SAS or any troops into combat roles in Iraq.
Our military can, and may well, play a part in building the capability and capacity of the Iraqi forces.
It’s what we’re good at and we have a proven track record of doing such work in Afghanistan.
Should New Zealand military personnel be deployed in Iraq they would be behind the wire and limited to training local forces in order to counter ISIL and legitimately protect innocent people.
Cabinet has asked for further advice from the military on this training option which would be filled by regular forces.
The further advice will take some time to be completed.
It will involve the assessment of how safe and secure a training location is and whether our security requirements could be met.
We are talking to our longstanding partner Australia about what they are doing to help train the Iraqi forces and how we might help.
New Zealand military planners will travel to the Middle East to assess the training option and then provide further information to Cabinet.
We are also looking at where our military could make a contribution outside Iraq, by supporting more longstanding operations where our partners have relocated resource to address ISIL.
All of this will be carefully thought through before final decisions are made and we are not yet committed to any military option.
What we will do is make a contribution that is in the best interests of New Zealand and in line with our values and skills.
I have no doubt some will argue when we do so, we increase risk to our people domestically, regionally and internationally.
My view is that there is already risk in all of those areas.
And the risk associated with ISIL becoming stronger and more widespread far outweighs that.
Ladies and gentlemen, New Zealand has long been portrayed as having a benign threat environment.
It gives me no pleasure to tell you that is changing.
As a Government we are focused on responsibly addressing the risks that the rapid rise of ISIL presents to us locally, regionally and internationally.
New Zealanders can be sure we are taking careful and responsible steps to protect their safety and security and we will continue to do so.
Our national security is something that affects all New Zealanders and all of them have a stake in it.
Thank you.
Your Excellency the Governor General Sir Peter Cosgrove,
Prime Minister Tony Abbott,
Distinguished guests,
Members of the Australian and New Zealand Defence Forces,
Ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls,
I am honoured to be with you today to commemorate a momentous event for our two countries.
From this place 100 years ago, ten ships carrying approximately 8,500 New Zealand troops of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force, joined 20,000 troops of the Australian Imperial Force.
Together, they sailed off to fight in a war on the other side of the world.
Major Fred Waite, author of The New Zealanders at Gallipoli, described the scene vividly, saying that as the New Zealanders’ vessels met the Australian fleet,
“The cheering and counter-cheering, the Maori war cries and answering coo-ees would have moved a stoic.
Young Australia was welcoming Young New Zealand in no uncertain manner in the first meeting of those brothers-in-arms soon to be known by a glorious name as yet undreamed of.”
They would, of course, become the ANZACs, and the very first part of their legend was written here in Albany.
Our troops set off with a keen thirst for adventure, driven by a fierce sense of loyalty to their countries’ and their mates, and a steadfast belief in the values and freedoms they sought to defend.
Their enthusiasm for adventure would be matched by the courage of their actions in torrid battlefields far from home.
In a matter of months the Gallipoli offensive would tragically claim the lives of more than 11,000 New Zealand and Australian troops.  Another 24,000 would be wounded. 
And worse battles were to follow in what would come to be known simply as “The Great War”.
Fewer than half of all those who departed our shores would make it home without injury.   Many thousands rest forever in Europe, Turkey, Palestine, and other far-flung battlefields.
In a war that engulfed the world, our young nations were among the hardest hit.  No community, rural or urban, was left untouched by loss.
But the service, and sacrifice, of those who fought for us – would play a critical role in forging our national identities.
Our experiences in the First World War marked an important point in our coming of age as countries.  They made us look at who we were: from colonies, we became nations. 
When we gather together to commemorate the ANZACs we mark no single military battle. 
We remember the sacrifice of our service men and women in many conflicts, and campaigns, far from home.
We give thanks for the privileges that we enjoy today because of the efforts.
And we reflect, soberly, on the cost of war.
In honour of their memories, we affirm our resolve to work for a better world.
We will not forget their service, and growing attendance at ANZAC day services on both sides of the Tasman testifies to this.
The ANZAC spirit remains a critical part of who we are.  It is still defined by those common values that sustained our soldiers fighting in foreign lands 100 years ago: mate-ship, courage, equality, self-sacrifice, and loyalty.
As we look out at the challenges that our countries, and the international community confront today, from the brutality of ISIL and its violent extremist ideology, to the spread of Ebola, or working with our close friends and neighbours in the Pacific, we acknowledge those who continue to serve us - and the courage and dedication of our service people who answer our countries’ call to service.  
We stand here today, and look back to the events of 100 years ago, with pride in those who left these shores to fight for us, and those that followed in their footsteps to other battles far from home.
We will always remember their service to our countries, and the Anzac bond that they forged.
Honourable Members of the House of Representatives.
E nga Mema Honore o te Whare Paremata o Aotearoa, tenei aku mihi mahana ki a koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Following the General Election, a National-led Government has been formed with a majority in the House on confidence and supply.
Confidence and supply agreements have been signed between the National Party and, respectively, the ACT Party and the United Future Party. A Relationship Accord and confidence and supply agreement has been signed with the Māori Party. These agreements will enable the Government to operate in an effective, stable and inclusive manner.
Honourable Members, the Government has a comprehensive policy agenda and a substantial legislative programme that it will put before the House in the forthcoming session.
The Government is focused on returning to surplus and its long-term fiscal objective remains to reduce net core Crown debt to 20 per cent of GDP by 2020. Around $1 billion of the operating allowance in each Budget will be used to increase spending, with the remainder set aside for tax reductions and further debt repayment, depending on economic and fiscal conditions at the time.
ACC levies will be reduced in 2015, and more reductions are expected from 2016, as the three levy accounts are now fully funded.
The Government’s plan to build a more productive and competitive economy, supporting more jobs and higher incomes, is set out in the Business Growth Agenda. This contains around 350 individual initiatives. These initiatives will be progressed, and more will be added, in this term of Parliament.
The Government will continue to pursue high-quality trade agreements, including negotiations with Korea and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, while ensuring that New Zealand’s best interests are always served. More investment will be made in New Zealand Trade and Enterprise, to expand the number of businesses it works with and increase its international footprint.
The Government will continue to provide the environment and incentives to increase business-led research and development, with a goal of raising this to 1 per cent of GDP by 2018. More funding will be provided for the R&D grant programme. The Government will also establish a Food Safety Science and Research Centre, as well as four additional Centres of Research Excellence, with one of the Centres focused on Maori research.
The Government will progress legislation to increase flexibility and fairness in the labour market, extend flexible working arrangements and improve collective bargaining. The enforcement of New Zealand’s minimum employment standards will be strengthened, and paid parental leave extended from 14 weeks to 18 weeks by 2016. Legislation to improve health and safety at work will be progressed.
The Government will complete the implementation of the Financial Markets Conduct Act, and will progress legislation to strengthen competition laws, and improve the accounting and audit industries.
The overhaul of Inland Revenue’s business systems and information technology will continue, which among other things will make tax compliance faster and easier for businesses.
Net migration to Australia has dropped considerably and the unemployment rate in New Zealand is lower than that across the Tasman. The Government will arrange job fairs for New Zealand employers in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane, to recruit skilled expatriate New Zealanders to return home and work in areas where there are shortages.
Job fairs will complement the Government’s skills training programme here in New Zealand, which involves strengthening and improving foundation learning, vocational training and tertiary education. Additional investment will be made this term in training more engineers, creating 2,000 more places in Maori and Pasifika Trades Training, and launching three ICT Graduate Schools.
The Government will continue its programme of investment in modern infrastructure.
In this term of Parliament, a number of projects in the Roads of National Significance programme will be completed, including the Waterview Tunnel, the Tauranga Eastern Link and the Mackays to Peka Peka route north of Wellington. The Government will progress the remainder of the Roads of National Significance programme, together with a package of state highway projects in Auckland and across the regions. New funding will be allocated for urban cycleways.
The Ultra-Fast Broadband programme will be extended to reach 80 per cent of New Zealanders. In addition, $150 million will be set aside to improve mobile coverage and broadband connectivity in rural and remote areas.
Honourable Members, the Government believes that balanced and sensible management of our natural resources can meet environmental responsibilities while creating economic opportunities.
The Government will continue to encourage petroleum and mineral exploration while adhering to strong environmental and safety provisions. This approach includes investment in new data acquisition projects such as aeromagnetic surveys and petroleum basin analysis.
Investment in regional water infrastructure will continue, to help these projects get underway. New water storage and irrigation projects can make land more productive and boost exports, while at the same time providing positive environmental outcomes.
The Government is committed to improving water quality and the way fresh water is managed. Water reform will continue through advancing the recommendations of the Land and Water Forum. The Government will also introduce a requirement for dairy cattle to be excluded from waterways by 1 July 2017. Coupled with this, the Government has set aside $100 million to voluntarily buy and retire areas of selected farmland next to important waterways to create an environmental buffer.
Legislation will be introduced to amend the Resource Management Act to provide more certainty, timeliness and cost-effectiveness around resource allocation decisions. The Environmental Reporting Bill will also be progressed.
The Government will introduce legislation to improve the responsible use, management and conservation of New Zealand’s ocean environment. This legislation will allow for a wider range of marine protected areas, including recreational fishing parks in the Hauraki Gulf and Marlborough Sounds.
The Government will work with international partners to put in place a comprehensive new global agreement on climate change by the end of 2015. It will also continue to participate in international research programmes, with particular emphasis on the Global Research Alliance on agricultural greenhouse gases. The Government will invest additional funding to encourage and support new forest planting, and will continue to focus on managing New Zealand’s emissions. 
Honourable Members, the Government will continue to deliver high-quality public services. It will remain focused on getting results, seeking new and better ways to deliver public services, and continuing to contain and reduce costs.
The Government has 10 priority goals and targets in the areas of long-term welfare dependency, supporting vulnerable children, boosting skills and employment, reducing crime and improving interaction with government. Good progress is being made on these targets, and two of them – in the areas of crime reduction and educational achievement – will be made more challenging.
The Government is committed to helping more people get off a benefit and into work. It will work to reduce the number of people receiving a benefit and reduce the lifetime costs of the welfare system. Legislation will be introduced to extend the Youth Service approach to 19-year-old sole parents, and to many other 18- and 19-year-old beneficiaries who need more support, or who are at risk of long-term welfare dependence.
As agreed with the Māori Party, ongoing investment will be made in Whānau Ora. The Government will continue to have a focus on poverty, especially child poverty, and will coordinate cross-government activity in this area through the Ministerial Committee on Poverty.
The Government will also have a focus on housing in this Parliamentary term.
More special housing areas will be created – and therefore more new housing developed – as a result of Housing Accords signed between the Government and local councils. Changes to the Resource Management Act will assist housing supply in the longer term.
The new KiwiSaver HomeStart Grant will be introduced next year to double the support a first home buyer can get if they are buying or building a new home, which will encourage the supply of more affordable new housing. House price limits around the country will be increased. Legislation will also be introduced to allow first home buyers to withdraw their KiwiSaver member tax credit to put towards a deposit. The Government’s extended home insulation scheme will make another 46,000 low-income households warmer and healthier.
The Government will continue working to ensure that vulnerable New Zealanders have access to good quality housing, whether those houses are owned by Housing New Zealand or by community housing providers. The Government sees community housing providers playing a greater role in the provision of social housing over this term of Parliament.
The Government will extend free doctor’s visits and prescriptions to children under 13. More will be invested in lifting the number of elective surgical procedures, particularly hip and knee operations, and in creating new, primary care multi-disciplinary teams to help people in pain from bone, muscle and joint conditions.
A new cancer treatment target will be introduced, for 90 per cent of patients to receive their first cancer treatment within 62 days of being referred by their GP. And the Government will invest extra funding to allow hospices to expand their care and services across the wider health system.
As agreed with the United Future Party, the implementation of the National Medicines Strategy will continue, including the enhanced role of pharmacists in medicines management and primary care.
The Government will extend the Enabling Good Lives approach so that disabled people have more choices, controls and flexibility over support and funding in their everyday lives.
The Government will this term implement its initiative to raise teaching quality and school leadership to deliver a better education to every student. This will keep the best teachers in the classroom, and establish new teaching and leadership roles to spread best practice across communities of schools.
The Government will also provide more in-class support to special needs students, by funding up to 800,000 more teacher aide hours each year. More funding will be supplied to support deaf and hearing-impaired children, and a contestable fund will be established for schools to establish or enhance Asian language programmes.
The Government will continue its work to lift participation rates in early childhood education, with a target of 98 per cent of new entrants in school having previously attended an early childhood centre. The Government also has a target of 85 per cent of 18-year-olds achieving a minimum of NCEA Level 2. Significant investment will be made in new schools and classrooms, including major projects in Auckland and Christchurch.
As agreed with the ACT Party, the Government will further develop the model, and expand the trial, of Partnership Schools to improve educational outcomes for disadvantaged students.
The Government will continue to focus on crime prevention. The crime rate is at a 35-year low, and violent crime, youth crime and re-offending are all declining. Across law and order agencies, a stronger response will be developed to prevent family violence, including a focus on gangs and gang lifestyles. The Government will progress legislation to address cyber-bulling, organised crime and online child abuse. It will progress the Parole Amendment Bill, introduce a Public Protection Order Bill, and intends to progress reform of the Privacy Act.
Every publicly managed prison will be made a working prison by 2017, so prisoners can take part in a 40-hour week of rehabilitation and reintegration activities. Specialist after-care will be delivered for those released or paroled prisoners who have undertaken a drug treatment programme while in prison.
Honourable Members, the Government recognises that Māori face unique opportunities and challenges in maximising their economic potential. This is reflected in the creation of a new ministerial portfolio of Maori Development. Reforms to Te Ture Whenua Māori Act will be progressed, so Maori land can be governed effectively and profitably for all its owners. The Government will also continue to resolve outstanding Treaty of Waitangi settlements, and intends for all willing iwi to have deeds of settlement by 2017.
Starting next year, New Zealand will take its place on the United Nations Security Council for a two-year term. This will be a challenging time for the Security Council and New Zealand is determined to make a positive contribution and in particular to represent the perspective of small states.
The Government is committed to a strong security and intelligence community which operates within a clear legal framework and with the security of New Zealanders at its heart. Under legislation passed last year, a review of the intelligence and security agencies, their legislation, and their oversight, will commence by 30 June 2015.
The Government has already commenced work on a review of settings in relation to foreign terrorist fighters taking part in, or returning from, conflict zones. The rapid rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant poses international, regional and local risks which the Government will respond to in a responsible way.
As has been well-signalled, the Government will put a possible change of New Zealand’s flag to a public vote this term. There will be no presumption of change, but there will be a very open process which will welcome and encourage full public input and debate.
Honourable Members, the Government is continuing to stand beside the people of Canterbury as good progress is made on the earthquake rebuild. The rebuild will continue to occupy a great deal of Government attention in this term of Parliament. Big strides will be made this term on anchor projects and horizontal infrastructure.  Next year, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority will be brought into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, and a transition plan developed to hand over CERA’s responsibilities and powers in an orderly way.
Honourable Members, over the course of the forthcoming Parliamentary session, other measures will be laid before you.
The Government is privileged to have won the trust and goodwill of New Zealanders for a third Parliamentary term, and will seek to re-earn that trust and goodwill every day over the next three years.
This afternoon I rise, full of gratitude to the people of Helensville, without whose support I would not be here today. The election in Helensville was, dare I say it, an unusual event, and I find myself in the unique position of being the only member of the National caucus to have beaten a National candidate to get here. As a result of MMP I am joined in this House by the only other member of Parliament for Helensville in New Zealand's history, Dail Jones, the member from 1978 to 1984. I acknowledge my parliamentary colleague. The Helensville seat was formed from the nucleus of the former electorate of Waitakere, so I wish to acknowledge the work carried out over the past 12 years by the previous incumbent, Brian Neeson. 
As a political rookie, I am indebted to a wide range of people for their support, encouragement, and knowledge, but in particular I wish to pay tribute to Thomas Grace, Beverley Revell, and James Ryan for their enormous contributions. I would also like to thank my family, specifically my wife Bronagh, and our children Stephie and Max, who are here to support me today. Politics demands many sacrifices of family life- an almost impossible challenge made possible by their understanding. Madam Deputy Speaker, I congratulate you on your appointment, and I look forward to being under your guidance in this Chamber.
Helensville is a microcosm of our society-from rural South Head on the Kaipara Harbour, all the way south to the urban belts of Massey, West Harbour, Greenhithe, and Albany Heights. For the most part, it is bordered by the rugged coastline of the Tasman Sea to the west and the rolling farmlands of Kaukapakapa and Paremoremo to the east. The Helensville seat is noted for its enterprising Dalmatian migrants, who, after initially settling as gumdiggers, struggled against the odds-including the threat of prohibition after World War 11-to foster a love of wine in a beer-drinking nation. The electorate includes some of New Zealand's longest established wineries. It also has a proud history for its association with our Air Force at Whenuapai and formerly at Hobsonville air base. The future development of the Hobsonville land now provides a real opportunity to enhance the local community. It could become the jewel of west Auckland's crown.
Every district has its challenges, and I am committed to finding solutions to the many real issues in my electorate, particularly those posed by rapid population growth. They include the need for extra intermediate and secondary schools, for an extension to the Auckland motorway network, and for increased levels of police services. I promise to be vocal on those and other local issues. 
I come to this House with high hopes of improving my fellow New Zealanders' lives by implementing practical, common-sense policies and legislation that will reflect the knowledge gained from my past life in the real commercial world. My views on life were shaped by a remarkable woman: my late mother, Ruth. At the age of 16, unable to speak a word of English, she escaped to London from the Nazi invasion of Vienna. After working as a nurse in the British army, she married my father, George, and they moved to New Zealand. When I was 6 my father died, leaving my mother penniless with three children to raise. From a humble start in a State house, she worked as a cleaner and a night porter until she earned the deposit for our modest home. She was living testimony that one gets out of life what one puts into it. There is no substitute for hard work and determination. Those are the attitudes she instilled in me.
So it is with first-hand experience that I acknowledge the need for a society that fosters personal responsibility, supports aspirations, and inspires dreams: a society based on meritocracy, where every citizen has every opportunity to reach the greatest heights their qualities allow. Poverty of expectation and ambition is not the way forward, nor is long-term dependence on welfare. As Peter Fraser once lamented, too many people expect welfare to provide an armchair ride to prosperity.
The success of New Zealand's future lies in the creation of a fertile economic
environment, propelled by a positive entrepreneurial attitude. For our small nation to produce long-term sustainable levels of economic growth, a number of factors will need to be addressed, including raising educational standards, cutting compliance costs, increasing the availability of investment capital, and improving productivity levels. We must create an environment that sends the message loud and clear that New Zealand is open for business. It is unacceptable to expect our business community and our investors to negotiate around legislation that is unworkable, impractical, or internationally uncompetitive. I remain baffled at legislation that simply puts New Zealand in the too-hard basket. The Resource Management Act is a prime example of a self-imposed straitjacket. Indeed, I have to say the only thing I find more compelling than the need to revamp the Resource Management Act is the fact that the Bledisloe Cup should run for only 79 minutes!
During my time working abroad, I was able to reflect on what it means to be a New
Zealander, and indeed on how privileged we all are. That said, I have been somewhat
surprised by what I have discovered since my return. A new wave of thinking has started to pervade our society: the type of thinking that just oozes political correctness at the expense of all else. Some have interpreted that as a reason to downgrade their ambitions for themselves and their country, and to believe that life is solely about competing, not winning, about taking part, not taking the lead, and about sipping from the half-empty glass, not quenching their thirst from the cup that is half full. This group has started to build an institutional psyche that whispers bleakly about our structural disadvantages. Those who cite Ireland or Singapore as economic miracles to emulate are quickly shot down by scoffers who claim we do not have the neighbouring population density, we do not have any EU-funded roads coming our way, or that the success of those countries does not translate into our Kiwi culture. 
My time in the commercial world taught me that there is one thing more important than tangible factors like product mixes, savings rates, or population density. That "something" costs nothing; that "something" is attitude. It is about having a dream, and then following it. It is about seeing oneself as a winner, and then acting like it. It is about hard work, discipline, and self-belief--or, as Tennyson said in his epic poem Ulysses: "To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield."
As politicians, if we really want New Zealanders to have those big dreams-to dare to win, knowing they might lose-then we must celebrate their actions and their results. We must create a climate of innovation and enterprise, where talent and ability can flourish and be respected, because, make no mistake, when enterprise is undermined, it is the weakest and most vulnerable who suffer to the greatest extent. For that group, moving to more fertile conditions simply is not an option. If we are to stride the path of our future with determination, purpose, and passion, then we have to create the kind of environment that allows all New Zealanders to have a positive attitude-an attitude that encourages us to come to terms with our history and binds us together so we can tackle our future as one people, an attitude of tolerance and respect for one another, interwoven with a realistic sense of fairness and personal accountability, and an attitude that defines us as Kiwis from a small nation with a big heart, who are confident we can meet and beat the challenges that lie before us.
And why should we not do so? Our young nation has some incredible competitive advantages. Our quality of life, our English legal system, and our history of stable government are just three items from a long list that could point to a bright future. With innovation, we can attract and develop capital, creating jobs that will anchor those gifted New Zealanders who pour out of our educational facilities every year. But we must not be scared to do things because they might offend small groups or seem unconventional. Good government is doing more than what is popular. Good government is more than blindly following the latest opinion poll. Good government is about leadership: providing our nation with an economic and social road map for enhancement.
On September 11 last year the world as we knew it changed. None of us will ever forget the sight of those commercial airliners hurtling senselessly into the New York skyline. Citizens of 86 nations died that day, including two Kiwis-a tragic and graphic illustration of how our world has changed, from isolated silos of nationalism to the brutal reality of globalisation. Nations now compete at unprecedented levels, with an unparalleled mobility of individuals, companies, and capital, and it will not stop. Lifestyle and nice beaches alone will not keep ambitious Kiwis here in New Zealand. The current diaspora of talent simply must be reversed.
I am proud to be a New Zealander. I am proud to be a member of this House. And to those who ask why I am here, I say it is because I want to rekindle the sense of adventure and pioneering spirit of our forebears, those courageous men and women who came to this new place carrying little more than their hopes and determination to build a better life. I have as a goal my ambition to build on their efforts and those of others who have preceded me, so that I may play my part in creating something even greater for those who have yet to arrive. 

This is not the time for a business as usual appointment for Secretary-General,We need someone who is up to the job.
The next Secretary-General must have the courage, experience and skills necessary to lead this organisation, to keep it relevant and responsive.
I've worked across the political divide from Helen Clark for years and I know her to be a natural leader.
She rallies people together to find the common ground, even when the issues are difficult and the differences vast. She gets things done. We think it's time for a Secretary-General like Helen Clark.
We were all there, the three of us, She was working the room pretty hard.
absolutely knows who Helen Clark is. We've raised it with him in the last few days. We've raised it with him over the last few months.
Let's wait and see how it all plays out but we are doing everything we can.
I took her over to Theresa and said 'look you haven't met, you guys should get to know each other.'
We have backed her from the start and we are going to back her right until the finish.
The internal politics within the Council and the sheer complexity of the Syria crisis have obstructed a unified Council response, But we believe that no matter how difficult and sensitive the issues, the Council cannot watch the situation go from bad to worse for the Syrian people.
We hope tomorrow's meeting will provide an opportunity for Council leaders to take stock of developments, examine the fundamental issues at the heart of the conflict, and discuss how we can move towards a sustainable political solution.
We also hope the meeting will be a chance for the Council to put its weight behind the ceasefire agreement reached between the United States and Russia.
That agreement is the best chance we have had in some time to stop the fighting, get aid to those who need it, and get back on track for a political resolution to the crisis.
In the Asia Pacific region, closer economic integration through trade agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership and Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership will also bring us closer together, We must guard against creeping protectionism, and be willing to make the case for more economic engagement clearly.
We cannot turn inwards. We can't allow fear, or narrow domestic interests to turn us away from an open global trading system, which has lifted millions out of poverty. Countries that close their borders can't do business.
The time for moving forward on Security Council reform is now. We will be pushing more than ever for action in the General Assembly to make the Council better reflect today's realities and needs.
Good morning. I hope you all had a good Christmas break and you're starting 2014 eager and energised.
I know I am.
And I know the Government is, because there are a lot of things to get done this year.
Later in the year there'll be an election, where I'll seek the support of New Zealanders to continue the direction this country is going in.
The economy is growing. More jobs are being created. Family incomes are rising. Crime is falling. More elective surgery is being done in public hospitals. Long-term welfare dependency is falling. And we're continuing to help families and older New Zealanders with generous income support.
As a country, we can keep going in this direction and continue to make gains, or we can change direction and go backwards.
And moving forwards is the only way to ensure we achieve the long-term growth that really changes New Zealand's fortunes and provides more opportunities for Kiwi families.
I can assure you I take nothing for granted when it comes to the election.
Each and every vote will have to be earned.
We have to work hard as a government, every day, to keep earning the trust and support of New Zealanders.
It may be election year but we won't be slowing down. There is far too much to be done.
MMP guarantees that every election is a tight contest.
We've shown we can deliver strong and stable government. We work with other parties for the good of the country, even when those parties have different policies.
That's what MMP requires.
I have always been optimistic about New Zealand.
As a country we have huge potential.
And as we begin 2014, things are really picking up.
The economy will grow strongly this year.
Our economic growth is forecast to be one of the highest in the developed world in 2014.
That means wages will keep growing, more jobs will be created and living standards will improve right across the country.
And it means we are catching up to other countries.
The Government will produce a budget surplus next year, when most other countries will still be in deficit and building up debt.
At the same time we are returning money to families and businesses through hundreds of millions of dollars of ACC levy reductions.
We have a business growth agenda with hundreds of initiatives to improve the productivity and competitiveness of the economy.
These range from negotiating free trade agreements, to boosting funding for business R&D, to rolling out ultra-fast broadband.
The Government's investment in infrastructure is bearing fruit as projects get off the ground and others are completed
A lot of work, for example, will be done this year on the Waterview Connection in Auckland, which will transform the roading network in our biggest city. And this year construction will begin on the Kapiti Expressway and Wellington's long-awaited Transmission Gully project.
This summer is the most active season ever for oil and gas exploration, with the industry spending up to $750 million. At the same time, the Government is strengthening the regulations that govern drilling, particularly in deep water.
We have a big programme of work this year to increase the number of houses being built around the country so there are more opportunities for young families to own their own home.
We are working to deliver better public services for New Zealanders - through the Police, courts, public hospitals, schools, tertiary training, and the many other ways that people and businesses deal with government.
Our approach is to put everyday New Zealanders at the heart of everything the Government does, so we organise services around them.
We now have more Police spending more time on the front line. We've introduced a range of measures to make communities safer, support victims, and rehabilitate offenders. Recorded crime is now at its lowest level in more than 30 years, with a 17 per cent drop over the past three years.
Over 40,000 more New Zealanders will get elective surgery this year than in 2008, and they will get that surgery faster. Almost all children under six can now go to the doctor after hours for free.
We are improving industry training and rebooting apprenticeships, and we're on track to get 14,000 additional new apprentices in New Zealand.
More people than ever are getting tertiary qualifications.
We're delivering significant reforms to the welfare system, with a far greater emphasis on work.

We're making progress in the big task of cleaning up waterways, and protecting and improving water quality right across New Zealand.

And we are continuing to support Cantabrians through the aftermath of the earthquakes and the rebuilding of their city.

Household incomes have been rising faster than the cost of living, right across the board, and income inequality has been declining. Despite what our political opponents try to claim, it is simply not true that the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer.

We are a very steady, centre-right government with the interests of all New Zealanders at heart.

Our approach is always to take the public with us by clearly outlining our actions and priorities, and always keeping in mind why we are in government - to make New Zealand a better place for Kiwis and their families.

So when I look forward to 2014, I do so with confidence and with optimism.

But that doesn't mean the job's done - in fact it's just begun.

It's vitally important that over the next few years we continue to build on the hard-won gains we are making as a country.

That includes a huge improvement in managing the country's finances.

We have made careful savings, been disciplined with spending, and run the public sector far more efficiently.

That's a lot different than the previous government, which increased spending by 50 per cent in just five years. That spending helped push mortgage rates to almost 11 per cent and crippled the internationally competitive parts of the economy.

New Zealand can't afford that approach again.

The Government will get back to running surpluses next year. At first they will be very small but they will build up over time. There might be some room for modest spending or revenue initiatives, but the top priority has to be getting our debt down.

The Government has borrowed - on behalf of New Zealanders - around $50 billion over six years to get the country safely through a recession, the greatest financial crisis since the 1930s, and one of the most expensive natural disasters in history.

In better economic times we have to reduce that debt.

That will lift national savings, and help keep a lid on interest rate rises as the economy heats up.

We also have to lock in the improvements we are making to New Zealand's economic settings. And we have to lock in the progress we are making in delivering better public services.

Those changes will continue to serve the country well.

New Zealand now has the opportunity to significantly improve its economic fortunes and provide a better future for New Zealand families.

We can achieve the long-term lift in economic performance that this country has aspired to for so long, providing we keep to our steady and responsible programme.

The alternative to locking in our programme of change is to go off into left field. And I really do mean left field.

I'll give you an example. If Labour and the Greens ever got in they would be the only government in the world to want less competition in their electricity market.

Less competition means higher prices. In Ontario, where they have the closest thing to Labour's electricity proposal, electricity prices have gone up more than twice as fast as in New Zealand.

On top of that, Labour wants an emissions trading scheme that would put up household energy bills by $500 a year - just like that.

They want people to work two more years before they can retire.

They want to reintroduce national awards like we had in the seventies - so hello strikes and goodbye productivity.

They want to put up income taxes and introduce a new tax on all productive businesses and farms in the country.

When you look at it closely, the alternative prescription from Labour and the Greens is a combination of high spending, untried economic experiments and a lack of focus on what really matters.

It would be a huge step backward when the country is so obviously moving forward.

So this year I want people to think hard about where New Zealand is going, and how to keep us on the right track.

I want people to think about who can provide strong, stable government in what is still an uncertain world.

And I want people to think about whose judgement and integrity they can trust.

I have always been very clear that the biggest influence on my judgement, and the way I think about politics, has been my upbringing.

I came from a family that didn't have much. But I was able to do well and have a successful career.

That's partly because of the beliefs instilled in me at home - to work hard and to aim high.

But equally important was the education I received at my local primary and high schools in Christchurch, and at Canterbury University.

That education opened the world to me.

So my upbringing and schooling shaped my views quite profoundly.

I believe people are ultimately responsible for their own lives and the well-being of their families.

But I also believe the Government should do what it can to provide children and young people with opportunities to succeed and do well, no matter what their family background or life circumstances.

That's why I have personally pushed through a number of policies for young people, including better mental health services, better trades training, greater support for teen parents, and breakfasts in schools.

I visit a lot of schools around the country, because they play a huge part in shaping the lives of our young people.

And I take my hat off to the teachers and principals across New Zealand who are making a real difference in lifting achievement.

A mountain of evidence shows that the quality of teaching - inside the classroom - is the biggest influence on kids' achievement.

I think everyone can remember the best and most inspirational teachers they had at school. I certainly can, and they made a big difference to my education.

The evidence also shows that, after teaching quality, the second biggest influence on achievement is school leadership.

To recognise this, we've introduced the Prime Minister's education awards for, among other things, excellence in teaching and school leadership.

That excellence is part of the reason our top students do as well as the best students anywhere in the world, and we should be rightly proud of that.

But we can't be complacent.

As I've said a number of times, far too many kids do poorly at school, and that's not something to be proud of.

New Zealand stands out among other countries for the wide gap we have between our top students and our lowest-performing students.

International studies also show that we are not keeping pace with achievement in other countries, particularly in maths and science. In fact, we have been on a gradual downward slide since the early 2000s.

In 2000, for example, our 15-year-olds were ranked fourth in the OECD's study for achievement in maths, with only Hong Kong, Japan and Korea ahead of us. Now we're ranked 23rd.

Today's 15-year-olds in New Zealand are performing worse, on average, than 15-year-olds in 2000.

That's despite a lot more money being spent on education.

So that has to be a call to action for all of us.

There's no doubt we have a good education system. But it's not as good as it could be. We need to make some changes.

For some time, the Government has been looking at what international research and evidence in education tells us, what the best performing countries are doing, what teachers and principals are saying they need, and what initiatives have been working here in New Zealand.

The first thing we did was start collecting better information, through national standards, because without good information everyone is simply stumbling around in the dark.

National standards have taken time to bed in, and we're working to improve the consistency of assessments. But the information they provide has been invaluable in determining where to put resources and effort to lift achievement.

Because lifting achievement, each year and in measurable steps, is the whole point of going to school.

So what's next?

Well, if teaching practice and school leadership are the most important factors for achievement, then it's obvious we need to strengthen the teaching profession and strengthen school leadership across the 50,000 teachers and 2,500 schools in New Zealand.

There are a number of things we want to do.

We want to keep top teachers in the classroom rather than having to go into management positions, or leave teaching altogether, to progress their careers. At the moment, our best teachers work their way up the career ladder by doing less teaching, and that shouldn't be the way it works.

We want to support a culture of collaboration within and across schools. That means the really good principals and teachers spending a lot more time sharing what they know, and how they work, with other principals and other teachers.

We want the best teachers and principals to lead a step change in achievement and we are going to pay them more to get it.

So today I am announcing four new roles for principals and teachers in New Zealand schools, and investing an extra $359 million into teaching and school leadership over the next four years.

These are changes that will benefit kids across New Zealand, because high-quality teaching leads to better achievement at school.

The first new role is an Executive Principal.

Executive Principals will be the top principals from across the country.

They will provide leadership across communities of schools, supporting other principals to raise student achievement.

We envisage there will be around 250 Executive Principals, or about one for every 10 schools, on average.

An Executive Principal will remain in charge of their own school but be released for two days a week to work across a grouping of schools, which will include primary and secondary schools.

Executive Principals will have a proven track record in raising achievement and they will pass on their knowledge and expertise to other principals.

They will be appointed by an external panel, for up to four years. Executive Principals will be paid an annual allowance of $40,000 on top of their existing salary, and they will be judged on their results.

So that's the first new role.

The second is a similar sort of position, again working across a group of schools, but at the teacher level.
These teachers we are calling Expert Teachers, and we intend to establish around 1,000 of these new positions.
Expert Teachers will have a proven track record in raising the performance of their students, particularly in maths, science, technology and literacy.
Expert Teachers will be based in their usual school, but will be released for two days a week to work across their school grouping, under the guidance of their Executive Principal.
They will get alongside other teachers, working with them to develop and improve classroom practice and raise student achievement.
Executive Principals will oversee the appointment of Expert Teachers and the appointment will be for up to four years. They will be paid an annual allowance of $20,000 on top of their usual salary.
Executive Principals and Expert Teachers will drive a whole new level of collaboration between schools and between teachers, with best practice becoming widespread across school communities.
The third new role we are going to introduce is for the top teachers in schools.
We want the best teachers to be recognised for improving student achievement and to act, in a formal sense, as role models for other teachers.
So we are going to introduce a new role - a Lead Teacher. There will be around 5,000 Lead Teacher positions across the country.
Lead Teachers will be high-performing teachers who can demonstrate the best classroom practice.
Their classrooms will be open to other teachers almost all the time, so teachers can observe and discuss classroom practice with a model professional.
Lead Teachers will be paid an annual allowance of $10,000 on top of their existing salary. That allowance is in recognition of their status and their new responsibility in helping other teachers to raise achievement.
These new roles of Expert Teachers and Lead Teachers means more good teachers will stay in a teaching role, because they can see a career path that keeps them in the classroom where they are so effective. And that has huge benefits for the children they teach.
We are going to give extra funding to schools so teachers can take time out of their normal classroom to work with Expert Teachers and Lead Teachers.
And we are also going to establish a $10 million fund for schools and teachers to develop and research effective teaching practice in areas such as writing, maths, science and digital literacy.
The final change I want to announce today is that we are also going to better match up schools that are really struggling, with really excellent principals.
To do this we are going to establish a new role of Change Principal.
Change Principals will be top principals who are paid an additional allowance of $50,000 a year to go to a struggling school and turn it around.
Around 20 Change Principals will be appointed each year, for up to five years.
At the moment, the incentive is for principals to go to larger schools, where the salary is higher, rather than to schools that are the most challenging.
We are going to change that.
So those are the four new roles we are creating - Executive Principals, Change Principals, Expert Teachers and Lead Teachers.
With all these new roles there are details to fill in and employment implications for teachers. The next step is to sit down over the next few months with representatives of the education profession, including unions, to further develop these proposals.
That process might result in some changes to the details of the policy, but our intent is clear. We want to recognise excellent teachers and principals, keep good teachers in the classroom, and share expertise across schools and amongst teachers.
And we intend to introduce the new principal and teaching roles from next year.
We plan to spend an extra $359 million over the next four years to fund these proposals, with the full-year cost rising to more than $150 million a year by the end of that period.
That's because we are prepared to invest in long-term policies that lift achievement.
In the end, these initiatives are about kids.
High-quality teaching leads to better achievement at school - the evidence is overwhelming.
And doing better at school has a profound impact on the lives of young New Zealanders - economically, of course, but also in terms of their ability to participate in society and contribute to their families and communities.
As you can see, we've got plenty on, and plenty of new ideas to keep pushing the country forward.
New Zealand is heading in the right direction.
The Government's economic programme is laying the foundations for a stronger economy, sustainable jobs and higher incomes.
We are making real progress in delivering better public services for New Zealanders and getting on top of issues like crime and welfare dependency.
And as you can see today, we have big plans for education.
It's important we continue to lock in and protect the gains we've made and keep making progress.
That takes constant hard work, oversight and judgement.
It takes a team working together and all heading in the same direction.
And it takes a government that is united, focused and energised.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's what I can promise New Zealand in 2014.
Let me start by saying to all of you - thank-you.

National would not exist without you. Thank you for all the work you have done to get us to where we are today. And thank you, in advance, for the work you are going to do as we run up to the election.

I want to single out two people in particular. The first is our party president, Judy Kirk. Judy is a tireless president. She is 120 per cent dedicated to the National Party.

The other person I want to single out is Bill English. Bill is the wise old head of our caucus - even if he is four months younger than me.

I want to ask you a question. Why have we given up our weekend to gather here in Auckland?

I'll give you one reason. We're sick of Labour telling us what to do. We're sick of being told how to bring up our kids, what to put in school lunchboxes, and that we have to microchip our dogs. We're sick of being told off for buying houses and for eating pies.


But it's more than that.

We are also here because we believe in the principles of the National Party. We believe in individual freedom and individual responsibility. We believe the government should underpin our society but not dominate it. We believe in the importance of families and of home ownership. We believe in an open and competitive economy. We believe in tolerance and respect for all New Zealanders.

In my opinion, the National Party has been at its very best when it has used its heart as well as its brain. Today I want assure you that I will lead a government for all New Zealanders.
This year I have announced some major pieces of policy.

Following my Burnside speech in January, I have made a number of policy announcements aimed at turbo-charging the efforts of community and voluntary groups.

I announced there would be unlimited tax breaks for volunteers and for charitable donations. I announced there would be significant changes in the way National would contract with community groups.

Our policy of removing the cap from charitable donations was very well received. In fact, it was so well received that Labour stole it word for word and announced it in this year's Budget.

But I know we will never break the cycles of disadvantage unless we give young people the skills they need. That's one reason I have a strong focus on education.

Another reason is this - I know from personal experience that education is a liberator. Unless we ensure that every Kiwi is equipped with a decent education, we are robbing them of a future.

As a starting point, I have announced that National will require all primary schools to test children against national standards in reading, writing and maths, and to report these results to parents.

I will not stand back as Prime Minister of New Zealand and let 1 in 5 kids leave school without anywhere near the level of literacy and numeracy they need to succeed.

And while we're at it we're going to bring hands-on trades and apprenticeship training back, where it belongs, in the heart of our school system. Let's make school relevant and interesting for all young New Zealanders.

This year I've also had a lot to say about the environment. I have made it clear that National takes the issue of climate change very seriously.

So, after careful deliberation, we announced our target of cutting New Zealand's greenhouse gas emissions by 50 per cent by the year 2050. This target strikes the proper balance between our economic opportunities and our environmental responsibilities.

It is the right thing to do. Unlike Helen Clark, I'm not going to make extravagant promises about carbon emissions that will send people to the dole queue.

Let me assure you that we are going to unfold a lot more policy over the next year, leading up to the 2008 election.

In that election, Kiwis will be voting for the sort of future they want.

The economy

I have some good news and bad news about the future. Let's start with the good news.

The prospects for New Zealand are better than they have been in decades.

We face a golden opportunity to become a more prosperous country. Demand is booming for the commodities we produce, especially dairy products. The world wants to buy protein and we are one of its biggest exporters. Countries are willing to pay good money for the food we produce, and we have a natural advantage in producing it.

What is more, some of those countries - particularly China and India - are getting wealthier all the time. They have a growing middle class, which more and more will want to buy high-quality foods. They want to travel. They want to educate their children. They will want safe places to locate their businesses.

They will look to New Zealand for these things. And they will do this on a scale which is almost unimaginable.

We are in the midst of incredibly powerful global trends which are going to sweep us along whether we like it or not. The question isn't whether those trends will happen. The question is whether we can take the most advantage of them.

We don't need 1970s vision, we need 2020 vision.

That's where I come to the bad news. The bad news is that right now there is a huge risk that we will miss the boat.

Our economy is seriously underpowered. Our productivity is declining. Because of this, our economy can't grow at more than a very modest rate without causing inflation, high interest rates, and an over-valued exchange rate. We're seeing this very clearly right now. Floating mortgage rates are over 10 per cent and the exchange rate is just off record highs.

I think of it like getting on an 80cc motorbike and trying to go 100 kilometres an hour. It's possible, but only if you rev the hell out of it. And if you do that, the engine will eventually pack in.

As a country we can't sustain that. Someone has to pay the price. Make no mistake: New Zealanders are paying the price for our underpowered economy. Homeowners, businesses, and exporters are being crippled by interest rates and the dollar.

The other result of an underpowered economy is that the rest of the world is pulling away from us. Our little 80cc economy isn't powerful enough to compete with more productive countries.

Of the 30 countries in the OECD, New Zealand is now ranked No 22 in terms of national income per person. We have managed to fall behind every single country in Western Europe with one exception, and that's Portugal. The countries we can now compare ourselves with are those in Eastern Europe, like the Czech Republic and Hungary.

So there are real issues with the fundamentals of our economy. You know what those issues are:

We have an infrastructure deficit throughout the country.

1 in 5 Kiwi kids leave school unable to read, write and do maths at the minimum expected level.

Skilled people are deserting the country in droves. Each week 760 people leave New Zealand to live in Australia.

New Zealanders are completely frustrated by the bureaucracy and over-regulation that hampers anything they try to do.

This Government shows no signs of being willing or able to deal with these issues. As Bill English talked about yesterday, Labour's main focus for the rest of this term is getting its Electoral Finance Bill passed so it can silence its critics in election year.

If ever there was a sign of a desperate, distracted, and dying government, surely this is it.

Our country is simply not living up to its potential.

We desperately need to grow our productive capacity. We can't just keep on pushing our existing capacity to the max. We need an engine that's bigger than 80cc. Then we could have good growth in our economy without pushing interest rates and the exchange rate sky high.

National has a plan for growing New Zealand's engine. Bill talked about this yesterday. We know what it takes.

It starts with progressively cutting personal taxes, and that will begin in Bill's very first Budget.

We will take a disciplined approach to government spending. You work too hard for us to waste your money.

We will stop the massive rise in head office bureaucracy that Labour has encouraged.

We will deal with the regulatory and compliance cost issues which smother New Zealand businesses.

We will invest in the infrastructure this country desperately needs to grow.

We will have an unwavering focus on education.

And, yes, as Nick Smith told Conference yesterday, we will reform the Resource Management Act.

Families

I unashamedly want New Zealand to be a more prosperous country.

I want us to foot it with the most privileged countries in the world. I want our families to have a pay packet each week that ensures them genuine choices in their lives. I want Kiwi families to have a feeling of security, and not to be living from one week to the next. I want our children and our grandchildren to be able to chase their dreams here in New Zealand, not for their dream to be leaving New Zealand.

Families are tremendously important. I think most New Zealanders would agree that the security, happiness and welfare of their family are the most precious things to them in the world. Perhaps that is why most of us can scarcely believe the horrific cases of child abuse that are becoming a regular feature of our news bulletins.

I was sickened to the very pit of my stomach by reports of the barbaric abuse that cost the life of three-year-old Nia Glassie.

In my first major speech as leader, at Burnside, I talked about there being an underclass in New Zealand. If anyone was wondering if this underclass really existed, then surely the circumstances of Nia Glassie's horrific death has erased all doubt.

Every five weeks in New Zealand a child dies at the hands of their parent or caregiver. As a society, and as a government, we must be single-minded in our intolerance of such behaviour.

These are the individual acts of individual New Zealanders. It doesn't matter what excuses are dreamed up for child abusers, there's no getting away from the fact that they are personally responsible for their actions.

We don't need to hear excuses for violence, we need it to stop. I want to send a very clear message: Under a government I lead, child abusers will be severely punished.

As Simon told Conference yesterday, National is committed to making changes to the Sentencing Act that reflect the way we think society should deal with these people.

Families are, in my view, the greatest institution in our society, however they are made up. A government I lead will support them.

But supporting parents, most of whom do a good job of raising their children, does not mean meddling in their lives or telling them what to do all the time. I believe in the power of people to effect a real change in their family's circumstances, if they are given the space and the encouragement to do so.

So I want to talk about two aspects of government support for families.

The first is Working for Families. There are a number of aspects of Working for Families I don't like.

I don't like the fact that it makes families face high effective tax rates and therefore penalises them if they want to better themselves. I don't like the way it reaches into relatively high income brackets. I don't like the way it subjects many taxpayers to the indignity of claiming their own money back in government payments.

Hard-working New Zealand families deserve a break, but we do best by giving them a break through cutting their taxes.

I know it is tough out there for people with kids, who are working long hours and trying to get by on a modest wage. In the absence of any tax cuts, families have been forced to rely on Working for Families payments to keep their heads above water.

So today I want to give New Zealand families some reassurance. National will address the issues of high effective tax rates under Working for Families. We will also take higher income families out of the Working for Families loop. But we will make these changes in conjunction with significant personal tax cuts.

A government I lead will take from taxpayers only what it needs. It won't take more than it needs, return it to you via the welfare system, and expect you to be grateful for the privilege.

The bottom line is that families will be better off financially under National. We are going to give New Zealanders the chance to get ahead under their own steam because that's what New Zealanders want and that's what they deserve.

Home ownership

The second issue relating to families I want to talk about is home ownership.

When you buy a house for the first time you are doing so much more than just shaking off your landlord. You are taking a long-term stake in a neighbourhood, and in the local community. You are buying a place where family occasions will be celebrated and memories made for as long as you want to live there.

Because you will be paying rates and a mortgage for the first time, you might start taking more interest in your local council, and in the New Zealand economy.

So buying a house is a vote of confidence in your own future and in New Zealand's future.

But the Kiwi dream of home ownership is under threat. Fewer New Zealanders own their own home than ever before. Some choose not to buy a house, but many more simply can't afford to buy one.

International surveys rank New Zealand as having the second worst housing affordability problem in the world. Auckland is one of the 25 least affordable cities on the planet. But it's not just a problem in Auckland. You can buy a condo on the Miami waterfront for less than the price of the latest beachfront apartment on the Kapiti Coast.

Even if you can afford a deposit on a home, you'll face higher mortgage interest rates in New Zealand than almost anywhere else in the developed world.

Young people who are working hard, and who are trying hard to save, don't know whether they will ever be able to afford their own home.

Frankly, I thought it was a bit rich of Helen Clark to say last weekend that Labour was concerned about housing affordability. Her Government has spent eight years over-taxing New Zealanders and letting interest rates go through the roof.

Tonight, Helen Clark should look in the bathroom mirror and ask: "What have I done for housing affordability in the past eight years?" She'll have answered before she's squeezed out the toothpaste. Nothing.

The truth is that when it comes to housing affordability, this Government is the problem, not the solution. It is the Government's economic management and its heavy-handed regulation that has made owning your own home unattainable for many people.

Onerous rules and requirements have made land more expensive and building on that land more expensive. Meanwhile, we're running out of people who are able to build houses in the first place. As a result of all this, there are not enough houses being built to replace the old ones and to keep up with population growth.

But I want to assure our young people that they needn't despair. A National Government will actively preserve and promote the home-ownership aspirations of everyday New Zealanders. We are a party founded on the principle of home ownership and we intend to deliver on that principle.

Back in 1936, when Labour was concerned with nationalising the means of production and advancing socialism, the National Party was concerned with home ownership and standing up for wealth creation through a property-owning democracy.

Unlike Labour, this issue is not new for our party. Mind you, it is true that Labour has been talking more about housing in recent times. The difference is that Michael Cullen has yet again been looking for new ways to tax it.

Unlike Labour, National has a concrete plan for making housing more affordable. It has four parts to it:

Ensuring people are in a better financial position to afford a house.

Freeing up the supply of land.

Dealing with the compliance issues that drive up building costs, and

Allowing state house tenants to buy the houses they live in.

I want to talk about these points in a little more detail.

No 1. We will make sure people can better afford to purchase and pay their mortgage on a home. We will lower personal income taxes, which will ease the burden of mortgage repayments, and will also help people who are saving for a house deposit.

We will also keep interest rates down by growing the productivity of the New Zealand economy. That will make a huge difference to people's ability to service a mortgage.

No 2. We will take the legislative actions required to ensure there is an increased supply of suitable land available to build houses on. Difficulties with the Resource Management Act, and disagreements between various arms of local government, too often slow the release of land. This drives up its price and the cost of its development.

Any changes we make to streamline and speed up the process of zoning or land release will require developers to build on that land within a reasonable timeframe. This will prevent the land-banking that is currently choking off the supply of land.

No 3. A high legislative priority for National will be amending the Building Act to pull back the red tape and instead drive quality through greater commercial accountability.

Labour's new Building Act has added enormous costs and delays for builders and councils. Development and building levies have tripled under Labour. Quite simply, these costs are making houses unnecessarily expensive for the average Kiwi family.

No 4. We will allow Housing New Zealand tenants who want to purchase the house they live in, to do so. Under National, they can own the place they call home. We will reinvest the proceeds straight back into replacement houses for those desperately needy families on the waiting list.

It's a win-win for everyone. The state housing stock is maintained, some families get to experience home ownership for the first time, and the most vulnerable in our communities get to move off the waiting list into affordable housing.

Alongside this four-point plan, National is also going to increase trades-training opportunities so New Zealand has more skilled people to build and develop new houses. This will start with our trades-in-schools programme, and will include boosting apprenticeship training. New Zealand has faced a critical shortage of builders, plumbers and electricians for far too long.

I can assure you that there is a whole lot more policy development to come in this area. We've been a party of home ownership since our inception in1936 and that's where we'll stay.

Under National, every young New Zealander should know that if they work hard and are disciplined about saving, they can expect to buy their own home.

Conclusion

Delegates. It is said in politics that governments get voted out, oppositions don't get voted in. Maybe that in itself is a good enough reason to toss this Government out.

But surely if the only reason we are elected in 2008 is because Labour has come to the end of its run, we will have failed ourselves. Our party has much more to offer than that. New Zealanders deserve more than that.

Our people deserve a vision for this country - a vision that's about them, not what's best for the Labour Party.

So let me say this. My vision is that when our children and our grandchildren are deciding where to make their life, they choose New Zealand; that in a global world where they are free to call almost any country home, they choose New Zealand.

And they do it because they can see a positive future where they will be paid what they are worth.

And they do it because we're a country that's growing in confidence.

And they do it because we're a country where people are safe and where we can see out our final years in dignity.

And they do it because we're a country that respects and cares for the land we live on.

And we care about our communities.

And fundamentally we care about one another.

So when you leave here today, and as you prepare for next year's election, never forget what you are fighting for. You are fighting for tomorrow. For the chance to shape tomorrow. For the chance to make a difference and to leave behind a better New Zealand

Because it's time. It's time for confidence. It's time for optimism. It's time for a National Government. It's our time.

That's what we are fighting for and it can't come soon enough.
Good Morning,

New Zealand has convened today’s high level meeting on Syria for one simple reason: no other issue more urgently demands the attention of world leaders.

The Syrian civil war is the most devastating conflict of the 21st century.

We see a country shattered, terrorism and extremism rampant, and the daily horrors of the deliberate displacement, starving and killing of civilians.

We join the Secretary-General in condemning Monday’s attack on a humanitarian convoy. There is no justification for attacking those who are trying to save lives.

Longer term, we will need to hold to account those most responsible for the appalling atrocities we have witnessed. This includes those responsible for chemical weapons attacks.

The scale of the Syrian refugee crisis has shocked the world. It has impacted millions of people in the region and beyond.

The conflict has created security threats that reach well beyond Syria’s borders.

After more than five years of violence, Syria has become a byword for failure.

Failure of the parties and their supporters to put peace, and the lives of innocent people ahead of self-interest and zero-sum politics.

Failure to respond to the crisis early to prevent this tragedy.

And a collective political failure, including by this Council, to do what must be done to end the conflict.

Today’s meeting is a chance for an open and honest discussion on how peace can be achieved.

It is critical that we rewrite this narrative of failure, and help set Syria on a path to peace.

Let’s be clear: no one will benefit from a continuation of this conflict.

The Syrian Government, which bears responsibility for starting this war, cannot win.

Nor can the many others whose support is allowing the conflict to continue.

Ultimately, Syrians must reach agreement on their future government. But at this point it is clear that Syrians by themselves cannot end this war.

The problem is not a lack of direction. The pathway for ending this conflict was set out by the Security Council in Resolution 2254 last December.

That resolution identified the steps required; a nationwide ceasefire, negotiations on a political transition, and a united front for fighting ISIL and other terrorist groups.

It also established a timetable for implementing them.

But that timetable was never implemented.

Today we all need to commit to restoring the cessation of hostilities, delivering aid to those who need it, and restarting political talks.

Last week’s arrangement between US Secretary of State Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov represents the best hope we have seen in some time.

We encourage Russia and the US to show sustained leadership and not let this opportunity slip away.

The next few days will be critical in restoring the cessation of hostilities and getting humanitarian aid flowing.

We urge the Syrian parties to abide by the arrangement.

This Council should unite to back those efforts.

A political solution needs to address the causes of the conflict and establish a new form of inclusive government.

And it must provide more than just cosmetic change with regard to the central question of President Assad’s future.

A political solution will involve unpalatable choices for both sides. It will take courage and pragmatism.

Anyone who insists on political red lines that block the necessary compromises will have to measure the delay they cause in terms of more lives lost, more refugees and more suffering.

Those with influence must reinforce to the parties – and to the Syrian Government – that a political solution is the only way out of this conflict.

And they must back these words with their actions.

This means encouraging the parties to seek outcomes around the negotiating table, rather than on the battlefield.

That also means not using the fight against terrorism as an excuse to shift our focus from achieving a political solution. Terrorism is a major consequence of the Syrian war. But it did not cause it.

Those countries with greatest ability to influence events have a particular responsibility in this regard. I speak in particular of those the Secretary-General identified in his UNGA address last year as being key to resolving this conflict: the US, Russia, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.

We call on these countries to work together to restore the cessation of hostilities over the next few critical days.

Advancing a political solution must be the priority in the weeks ahead.

The people of Syria deserve this much.
t’s a special pleasure to speak to the General Assembly under the Presidency of a Pacific Island friend.

Mr President,

The world is facing serious challenges. 

Borders are closing to people and products, to investment, to ideas.  Many States are turning inwards. 

The politics of fear and extremism are gaining ground.  Too many States are flouting the rules.

But no country can face today’s challenges alone.

Now more than ever, we need to show we are united in our respect for the principles of the UN Charter. 

These are the basic principles that underpin our global system, borne from the bitter experience of war. 

And they are as relevant today as they were in 1945.

My country, New Zealand, is a proudly independent, multicultural trading nation in the Asia-Pacific.  

The international system matters to us. 

We are committed to being a good global citizen and playing our part.  We rise on the fortunes of all member States. 

We believe it is in all our interests to be open and outward facing, to work through our differences, to have rules and to play by them.  

Now is the time to reinforce the relevance and standing of the United Nations in our response to today’s challenges.

Mr President,

There are many areas where the UN could be more efficient, more representative, more responsive, and show greater leadership.

And it is our collective responsibility, as Member States, to front up with the political commitment necessary to make the UN the body that we want it to be.

For the last two years, our focus has been on the Security Council.   

We are using our term on the Council to raise the tough issues, because we believe that’s what the Council is for and what our supporters expect us to do.  

New Zealand is working for a Security Council that shows more leadership on the toughest political issues; that works harder to get the incentives right to broker solutions; and that is better at responding to political crises before they spiral out of control. 

The Council has put its weight behind many successes, from the adoption of the Iran deal to ending the long running war in Colombia.

But the Council also has shortcomings that if not addressed, risk undermining its relevance and standing in world affairs.  

For the vast majority of UN member states, which are dependent on a fair, rules-based international system, a weak Council is not an option.

We acknowledge that the Council does not have a role in every crisis.  But the reality is that we need the Council to respond when no one else can.  This is why we have consistently called for Council action to revive the Middle East Peace Process. 

We have also been deeply troubled to see the Council, the pre-eminent body for international peace and security, fail to live up to its responsibilities on the most serious crisis of our time.  Syria.

Here the Council has fallen short. 

The internal politics within the Council and the sheer complexity of the Syria crisis have obstructed a unified Council response. 

But we believe that no matter how difficult and sensitive the issues, the Council cannot watch the situation go from bad to worse for the Syrian people. 

The Security Council was established to address crises like that which we see in Syria.

That is why New Zealand is using our Presidency of the Council to convene a leaders’ level meeting tomorrow on Syria.

A meeting by itself won’t stop the conflict.  But after more than five years of brutal fighting, and horrific humanitarian suffering, we do not think it is credible for Leaders to come to New York and not address the stark realities driving the conflict.

We hope tomorrow’s meeting will provide an opportunity for Council Leaders to take stock of developments, examine the fundamental issues at the heart of the conflict, and discuss how we can move towards a sustainable political solution.

We also hope the meeting will be a chance for the Council to put its weight behind the ceasefire agreement reached between the United States and Russia.

That agreement is the best chance we have had in some time to stop the fighting, get aid to those who need it, and get back on track for a political resolution to the crisis.

Mr President,

Another critical issue on which New Zealand supports unified Council action, is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

New Zealand believes that a strong international response is required to the DPRK nuclear test on the 9th of September, and its recent missile tests.

The regime’s efforts to advance its nuclear and missile programmes; its callous disregard for the North Korean people - as demonstrated by the dire human rights situation in the country; and its leader’s unpredictably ruthless rule have made it one of our most pressing international security threats.

Its provocative actions show blatant disregard for Security Council resolutions and pose a grave threat to the international law.

They have raised tensions on the Korean peninsula to a point where the risk of conflict is dangerously high.  We cannot afford further escalation.  

So New Zealand welcomes recent steps by the US and China to begin negotiating a new Security Council Resolution, following the DPRK’s recent nuclear test.  

We hope that this will send a clear signal to the North Korean leadership that continued provocative and dangerous actions are unacceptable; and that a return to the negotiating table represents the only sensible way forward. 

The international community must stand together in conveying these messages, including through fully implementing Security Council sanctions.

Mr President,

The Council has impact and influence when it is unified, but we have to get better at identifying incentives that encourage unified Council positions.

As a country with a proud tradition of being a pragmatic bridge-builder and problem-solver, the Council can be an incredibly frustrating place to work.

But we are committed to trying to make it work because it is in our collective interest to have a strong and relevant Council. 

We all need to make an investment in keeping it on track where it is needed most – in preventing and stopping conflict. 

This means coming to the Council ready to find a way to get beyond vested political interests and being prepared to work on compromise solutions that stop the fighting.

The veto plays a huge part in the Council’s effectiveness. 

No matter how hard we work to find compromises, time and time again we come up against the veto.

The use of the veto, the threat of the veto. The exploitation of the veto is well beyond what the founders of the United Nations envisaged.

We acknowledge that addressing regional and national interests is a fundamental part of the process of finding durable solutions. 

But increasingly the Charter is being ignored and the Council seen as irrelevant as countries put pursuit of their national interests before all else.  

The time for moving forward on Security Council reform is now.

We will be pushing more than ever for action in the General Assembly to make the Council better reflect today’s realities and needs. 

Mr President,

New Zealand is also working to make the Council more effective in conflict prevention.

We want to make the Council better at responding to political crises before they spiral out of control. 

There is no lack of mandate for conflict prevention.  It’s in the Charter.  

There is no lack of information about escalating situations.  We see the evidence of this – often in the most heart-breaking images in the media.

The problem is that we don’t always have the will and we don’t use the tools available to us. 

Many States block action, asserting sovereignty and ignoring the rest of the Charter. Others don’t want to spend the money. 

Most have bilateral or national interests.  And leaders of countries in political crisis often don’t want their actions to be on the Council’s agenda.

But we cannot ignore the growing gap between the humanitarian costs of picking up the pieces after conflict and the amount the UN allocates to prevent conflict.  

The shortfall is growing at an unsustainable rate, while the peace operations budget is increasing year on year.

But this is not about money. It is about saving lives. 

That is why New Zealand is trying to get the Council working more closely with regional organisations and getting the Council to be more willing to engage at an earlier point with countries in crisis.

This is a focus of our Presidency, and it will continue to be a focus of our work when we come off the Council. 

Mr President

Beyond the Security Council, parts of the UN system are stepping up.

There have been significant steps forward on development, climate, financing, humanitarian and disaster risk reduction. 

These issues are of significant importance to our closest development partners – Small Island Developing States.

For economic development to be fully realised, the sustainable development goals must be implemented by all.

But developments here in the UN do not exist in a vacuum from the global economy and trading system.

Sustainable economic development is a key driver of global growth, prosperity and stability. 

This requires a fair, rules-based trading system, more open trade and the removal of trade barriers. 

The multilateral trading system has been a critical factor in this. 

Last year, we welcomed an agreement by the WTO to eliminate agricultural export subsidies.  

This was the first legally binding international trade outcome in agriculture since 1994.

This matters for development and will make a real difference for rural communities. 

But the types of challenges that the UN faces are similar to those that have hindered more progress in the WTO in recent years. 

And New Zealand believes that the WTO needs to do more to set global trade rules.  

We need it to find common ground that overcomes vested national interests, and agree to new international trade commitments that benefit all countries.

In the Asia Pacific region, closer economic integration through trade agreements like the Trans Pacific Partnership and Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership will also bring us closer together.

Agreements like these will make our region and people better off by setting the conditions for more open and transparent trade. 

A more prosperous and integrated region will also be a more secure one.  And that is in all of our interests.  

Mr President

We must guard against creeping protectionism, and be willing to make the case for more economic engagement clearly. 

We cannot turn inwards. 

We can’t allow fear, or narrow domestic interests turn us away from an open global trading system, which has lifted millions out of poverty.

Countries that close their borders can’t do business. 

History has shown that this doesn’t work for our countries.  It will not help our people.  

And protectionism will have a chilling effect on our ability to deliver on the sustainable development goals.

Mr President,

A decision of critical importance to the future of the United Nations will be made in the coming weeks.

In April I was very pleased to nominate former New Zealand Prime Minister Helen Clark to be the first UN Secretary-General from the Pacific.

This is not the time for a business as usual appointment for Secretary-General. We need someone who is up to the job.

The next Secretary-General must have the courage, experience and skills necessary to lead this Organisation, to keep it relevant and responsive.

I’ve worked across the political divide from Helen Clark for years and I know her to be a natural leader. 

She rallies people together to find the common ground, even when the issues are difficult and the differences vast. 

She gets things done.

We think it’s time for a Secretary-General like Helen Clark.

Mr President

In conclusion, I am proud of the contribution New Zealand is making to the Security Council but I am keenly aware of the Council’s limitations.

It is the General Assembly that now needs to act to make the UN stronger and more relevant to the world.

Mr President,

New Zealand is committed to the principles and values of the UN.

We will keep working hard for these principles because we believe they are vital for a safer, more prosperous future.

Thank you.
Thank you Stephen for your introduction, and your work in running this important event.

Mr Speaker, can I acknowledge you and thank you not only for opening proceedings today, but also for your tolerance and patience in refereeing Question Time each sitting day.

I also want to acknowledge other MPs from across the House, and all of you who have chosen to take time out from your busy lives to reflect on September’s general election.

There have been nine previous books arising from the post-election conferences, with a 10th to follow from today’s proceedings.

This can only be a good thing.

The immediacy of the modern news cycle, together with social media, creates a focus on instant reporting and judgement, but it is also important to reflect in a more considered way on important events like elections.

Academic scrutiny of elections, politicians and political parties is an important function of democracy and also something that strengthens it.

As Prime Minister, I am privileged to represent New Zealand at international meetings around the world.

On these occasions, I often see first-hand the steps that emerging democracies take.

And they are not always steps forward.

I recently took over from John Howard as the Chairman of the International Democrat Union, a grouping of some 50 or so centre right parties from around the world.

At its most recent meeting in Korea, where I was represented by my Cabinet colleague Hekia Parata, the IDU admitted a number of new parties.

These included parties from Lebanon and Montenegro – countries where there are challenges and where people do not enjoy all of the privileges of our democracy.

In contrast, New Zealand can boast of an unbroken parliamentary democracy stretching back to the 1850s, and universal suffrage from 1893.

Few countries can match our record of democracy, or our openness, stability and focus on the rule of law.

So I welcome this discussion on the 2014 election, and the setting out of the views of participants so people in 20, 50 and 100 years’ time can think about what happened and why.

Steven Joyce, who was National’s campaign chair, is going to go through the 2014 campaign in a bit more detail.

I want to put the election, and its result, into the context of the last six years, and then look forward to the future.

I want to start by putting on record what a privilege it was to win a third term.

I can speak for all my National Party colleagues in saying that we are conscious every day of the trust that voters have placed in us.  We are determined to repay that trust.

Achieving 47 per cent of the party vote highlighted the support the modern National Party has.

Periodically I say to my caucus colleagues, when you walk down the street, look at the people you pass by and think about how we need to reflect the hopes and aspirations of one in every two of them.

That requires a very broad appeal, built on a strong understanding of our communities – women and men; Māori and Pākehā; Pasifika and New Zealanders from other ethnic communities; the old and the young.

This is at the heart of the National Party.

While we were formed by a mix of farmers and small business owners more than 70 years ago, today we are a much broader church and long may that remain.

What’s more I never take our support for granted.

When I look at the current fragmentation of the political left, I recall 2002.

The year I first became an MP was also National’s worst election result.  We learned a lot about ourselves in the years that followed 2002.

One lesson is that voters look forward as well as back. Even being a major political party will not insulate you from punishment if the voters consider you to be irrelevant to their world and to their hopes and aspirations.

Looking back at the 2014 election, I want to start at the beginning of the year.

In the interests of transparency and predictability, I thought it was important to explain to the public who we could or couldn’t work with in a prospective government.

So that’s what we did in February.

My stated preference was to continue working with the three parties we had enjoyed confidence and supply agreements with since 2008 – ACT, United Future and the Māori Party.

Over six years, notwithstanding a few ups and downs, we worked constructively with these parties to provide New Zealand with the stable government people want.

This is an appropriate point for me to acknowledge and thank United Future’s Peter Dunne, Tariana Turia, Pita Sharples, and Te Ururoa Flavell from the Maori Party and from ACT, their leaders going back to Rodney Hide and more recently John Banks and now David Seymour.

We also said we could work with the Conservative Party.

Ultimately, however, we took the view that there should be no electoral accommodation with them.

Ohariu and Epsom were the limit.

Even still, Colin Craig did very well – 4 per cent is a lot of votes.

In fact, the word we were getting from our candidates across the country was that in the last week or two, National voters were seriously considering voting Conservative in an effort to ‘help’ us.

We wanted to tell people that taking a vote off National to vote Conservative didn’t actually help us.

Hence our strong advertising along the lines of ‘if you want a National-led government, vote for it’.

Perhaps the strongest call early in the year was to leave open the possibility of working with NZ First and Winston Peters.

A lot of time, and two elections, had passed since 2008. NZ First, with Winston Peters as leader, had been returned to Parliament in 2011, so the electorate had – in an important sense – made their judgement about the party.

So it was timely to look forward not back.

As it turned out we didn’t need NZ First, and we have formed the third-straight government with ACT, United Future and the Maori Party.

In March I also named the election date as 20 September.

As in 2011, it was my view that naming the election day many months in advance was the right thing to do.

It assisted business confidence, and gave all political parties and agencies involved in the election time to properly plan.

A key reason for choosing 20 September was to enable a new government to be formed so that the Prime Minister - whoever it was - could attend the important multi-lateral meetings taking place at the end of the year.

I believe that the benefit New Zealand has gained from APEC, the East Asia Summit and G20, and of course the incoming visits of President Xi, Chancellor Merkel, and Prime Minister Harper, demonstrate that the right decision was made.

I hope that future prime ministers will continue both the practise of announcing the election date some months early, and scheduling elections to allow attendance at these important meetings.

Looking ahead to 2017, that is certainly my intention.

Perhaps the one downside of naming an election day some months in advance is that the press gallery get impatient to move straight into the campaign, and even into post-election negotiations, well before the election.

That is all very premature, and we were more concerned with bedding-in a strong fiscal situation and making more progress on reforms across a range of areas.

We also took the opportunity to rejuvenate the National caucus.

With 14 retirements last term, National has been able to bring in a large and talented new back bench that augers well for the party’s future.

I have also made changes to the Cabinet, refreshing both people and portfolio allocation to give us a strong sense of energy as we start our third term.

In my view, the failure of the Clark government to refresh both the Cabinet and caucus contributed to its defeat in 2008, and has continued to dog Labour since.

By the time of our annual conference in Wellington at the end of June, candidate selection was largely complete.

That conference opened at a time of high polling numbers for National. As an example, the TV3 poll on 26 June had National on 49.7 per cent and Labour on 27.3 per cent.

So a key theme for the Party President Peter Goodfellow, Steven Joyce, and I, was the absolute imperative of avoiding complacency.

I recalled the 2011 election, where despite all of the polls National only won narrowly.

While Labour was constantly talking about the ‘missing million’, what was clear was that many of the people who didn’t vote in 2011 were National supporters.

In particular, a number probably believed the talk in the media that we would win easily so didn’t bother to vote.

That, and the inevitable closing of the gap that occurs in campaigns, meant a very tight contest in 2011. I was concerned that could happen again in 2014.

The campaign team led by Steven Joyce and Jo de Joux were certainly taking nothing for granted, and a very strong ‘get out the vote’ campaign was well underway by the time of the annual conference.

We also wanted to point out to New Zealanders the chaotic relationships between our opponents, and the impact this would have on any alternative government.

In the end this lead to our effective rowing boat ads, which reinforced what was clearly already a concern held by many voters.

The strong advertising campaign reflected the strength of the broader campaign, and the contribution of National Party members and supporters, from the President down.

Experience and genuine enthusiasm make a real difference.

It is fair to say though, that events out of our control meant that for much of the campaign, policy issues were not top of minds, for the media at least.

When the Hager book came out it became clear that much of the campaign would be about so called ‘dirty politics’, even though the voters wanted it to be about policy and the future of our country.

Throw in the made-for-TV personality Kim Dot Com and the recipe for a most unusual campaign was complete.

My views on the Hager book are well known, so I won’t repeat them here.

During the campaign it became clear that New Zealanders were frustrated with the attention given to the whole saga.

That was the impression I got very strongly on the campaign trail, where there was a lot of support for National and general bemusement that a couple of issues they didn’t care about were taking over the whole campaign.

On the positive side, the risk of complacency was well and truly over.

Polls also highlighted just how close the election between the centre right and left wing blocks could be.

Just a few days out from election day came the so-called Dot Com ‘moment of truth’.  And so it came to be, but not in the way he and his supporters intended.

The level of anger was palpable. The next day my office received a large number of calls from ordinary voters outraged at what was going on.

I have sometimes wondered how many additional votes National may have won as a result of this whole exercise.

There is of course no way of knowing.

But I do know from feedback we received at the time that the combination of Hager and Dot Com galvanised National voters to get out to the polling booths in big numbers.

One of the most pleasing things to come out of the 2014 election was that it reinforced the notion that New Zealanders make up their own minds and won’t be dictated to.

Achieving 60 seats in Parliament under MMP was a superb result and shows National’s widespread appeal.

I put this result down to five key factors.

First, New Zealanders understood the strength of the economy and that this flowed directly through to more jobs and better paying jobs for them and their families.

Second, voters saw National had a plan for the future that was consistent with their hopes and aspirations. We were talking about the things that really mattered to people’s futures.

Third, over six years in government we had won the trust of voters.

We had always been very careful to get a mandate for reform – including the mixed ownership model – and we kept our promises.

Our approach has been to undertake incremental, sustainable reform, and to take the electorate with us, as opposed to what might be described as the ‘big bang theory’ of politics.

Fourth, we had the strongest team. Put simply, many New Zealanders were not listening to Mr Cunliffe.

Finally, we ran the best campaign. It really did make a difference.

At the end of it all, I said on election night that I was determined to govern for all New Zealanders.

I feel that just as strongly today as when I said it back on 20 September.

There will be challenges over the next three years.

New Zealand is a small country that makes its way in the world by trading with others, and we do feel the impact of events that take place far from home.

But throughout it all I remain optimistic for our future as a country. There is so much we have going for us.

At the core of my government is a clear focus on the economy.

I have said before, and want to repeat today, how fortunate New Zealand is to have Bill English as Minister of Finance.

It was fitting that, after a little persuasion from yours truly, Bill joined me on stage on election night.

He deserves a lot of the credit for the success of our government.

As this speech is to be incorporated into the latest post-election book, I also want to take the opportunity to place on record my appreciation to my wife Bronagh.

Everyone involved in politics understands the pressure it puts on family life.

Throughout my time in politics Bronagh has been supportive of me following my dream -- with all the ups and downs that entails.

My children Max and Stephie have also been supportive, and it’s not always easy having a father who is in politics.

As for me, I am just as excited to be Prime Minister as I was on the day my first Government got sworn in back in November 2008.

It is a great privilege and one I never forget.
Chairman Andrew Hunt, President Peter Goodfellow, fellow National party members.

Thank you for that warm welcome.

It’s great to be back home, in New Zealand, and I am delighted to be here in Waitangi for our first regional conference since the last election.

Sometimes that feels like a long time ago!

I was reflecting on the long flight home about the visit, and in particular on both the continued relevance of ANZAC Day and the future potential of our trading relationship with the wealthy Gulf States.

It was a huge privilege to lead our country’s delegation to Gallipoli, and it was an experience that neither Bronagh nor I will ever forget.

And from talking to a good number of our fellow Kiwis who won a place in the ballot and travelled all the way to Turkey, many other people feel the same way.

I felt the same sense of pride reading and watching the news reports of the record numbers attending ANZAC Day services throughout New Zealand.  Not just in the big cities, but in the small towns and regions that make up such an important part of our community.

While inevitably on ANZAC Day we look back to pay our respects and commemorate those who have fought to protect our country and our way of life, it is also an occasion that speaks of our increasing confidence as an independent nation making its way in the world.

History has shown us that no one owes New Zealand a living; that as a country we have to earn it by selling goods and services to others around the world that want to buy them.

This central importance of trade to our economy was at the heart of my visit to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait once the ANZAC Day celebrations were complete.

There are enormous opportunities in these countries, for everything from our agricultural produce to export education.

And while these trading relationships will take some time to build, I was happy with the progress made and the foundation laid.

But as I said, it is great to be home.

And it’s great being here with my fellow National party members and activists here in the Northern Region.

Our focus at this conference is, as it should be, on looking forward. But I do want to take a moment to thank you all for your hard work in the run up to the 2014 General Election.

Winning a third term is never easy, and your region delivered superb party vote results and I would not be standing before you as Prime Minister without that support – so thank you.

It was only eight months ago that we celebrated our election victory in Auckland, and I know that many of you were there for what was a great night.

You know what – I am optimistic that with continued hard work we can and will achieve a similar result in 2017.

And make no mistake – that is the result our country needs if we are to see continued strong economic growth with the positive impact that has on our communities and the lives of our families.

I am just as committed today to leading National to victory at the next election as I was when first taking up the role as your Leader in November 2006.

Now that really does seem a long time ago!

In the years since we have made a real difference to our country. Many people’s lives are better because of the work we have done and the policies we have put in place.

But there is more to do and National in government has much more to offer in the years ahead.

I want to acknowledge a number of people for their roles in our party and the difference they continue to make every day.

Peter Goodfellow our President leads the party organisation so well and ensures that we are well funded and organised to fight each general election.

To my other colleagues on the Board, thank you for your leadership and commitment. It is not always an easy task to oversee the governance and rules of the party, but you do an excellent job.

To Regional Chair Andrew Hunt and his team; Northern is a very large region and all of your work building strong electorate and regional teams is vital and much appreciated.

I want to acknowledge and thank my ministerial colleagues from the region. They do a great job individually in their portfolio areas and collectively – Steven Joyce, Paula Bennett, Jonathan Coleman, Murray McCully, Nikki Kaye, Tim Groser, Sam Lotu-Iiga, Maggie Barry and Paul Goldsmith.

The region has also sent to Parliament a very strong a talented group of back bench MPs who make a significant contribution to our Caucus, and I thank them for their ongoing work – Kanwal Bakshi, Andrew Bayley, Judith Collins, Melissa Lee, Mark Mitchell, Alfred Ngaro, Simon O’Connor, Parmjeet Parmar, Shane Reti, Maurice Williamson, Jami-Lee Ross, and Jian Yang.

Can I also acknowledge our candidate in the recent Northland by-election, Mark Osborne.

We were all very disappointed that the result wasn’t in our favour, but can I say Mark that you did everything asked of you in what were difficult circumstances. I want to thank you and Jodi on behalf of the party.

I also want to thank Rose May for all her commitment and hard work during the by-election. It is no easy task being the electorate chair during a by-election, and I know how hard she worked for the cause.

In this regard, I want to also thank the electorate chairs from the neighbouring electorates – I know just how much help and resources you provided to Northland.

As the media were helpful enough to point out at the time , the result in Northland was a loss. And a bad one too.

There are always lessons to be learned in defeat, and we are working together to understand what went wrong and to take those lessons on board.

I acknowledge that in Mr Peters the Northland electorate has a new MP for the next two-and-a-half years until the next election.

On my first visit back to Northland since the by election, this is my message to the voters in this electorate.

As a government and as a party, we are going to actively work to regain your trust and confidence and we intend to win the seat back in 2017.

Earlier this morning I made a pre-Budget announcement that once again demonstrates our commitment to this region.

As you know, in my role as Minister of Tourism I have been for some years now actively promoting the construction of a nationwide network of cycle trails.

These cycle trails have been enormously successful drivers of local and international tourism, and the number of people using the over 2,500 kilometres of Great Rides is growing all the time.

Completing the Twin Coast Cycle Trail here in Northland is a crucial next step in the network.

So I was delighted to announce this morning that the government has set aside $3 million to work with the Far North District Council to get the last third of this trail completed.

Local Mayor John Carter sees this project as integral to the region’s tourism strategy over the coming years, and I agree.

Government support for projects like this would not be possible without a strong economy and sound fiscal policy.

In just a couple of weeks or so, Bill English will be presenting his seventh Budget to Parliament.

I want to acknowledge Bill for all the work he has done to lead our economy back into strong, sustainable growth.

Under Bill’s stewardship the economy is performing well.

Last year New Zealand was among the fastest growing economies in the world.

We remain on track for solid economic growth that builds on over 3 per cent achieved in the last four years.

Economic growth is not some kind of abstract measure – it means that tens of thousands of new jobs are created each year.

Unemployment is expected to fall below 5% over the two years, which is great news for our communities. 

What’s more, these strong levels of economic growth mean that wages rise faster than the cost of living.

I am optimistic that our economy will continue to perform well.

The main reason for that is the positive attitude of households and businesses – backed by the government’s careful and balanced economic programme.

The upcoming Budget will demonstrate the government’s commitment to maintain a considered economic course so that we can manage the risks and challenges that an ever changing and uncertain world presents.

One thing is certain though; the economic prescription of a Labour/Green government would not be in New Zealand’s best interests.

We have much to do, both as a government and as a party, ahead of the next general election.

None of us should take for granted the current strong levels of public support the party enjoys.

I certainly don’t.

We are going to have to work hard to earn each and every vote.

One of our key tasks will be to implement over the next three years the policy promises we made to the electorate last year.

In Health and Education to name just two areas, we made commitments to implement policies that will have a direct and positive impact on many people’s lives.

And the good news is that progress will be made in this month’s Budget in making these commitments a reality.

Ministers will have more to say on this in the coming days and weeks.

But if there is one thing we have learned about being in government, it is that the electorate is always looking forward and not back.

Yes, they want us to implement our election commitments. They want us and in fact expect us to keep our word, and we will.

But more than that, the voters expect a forward-looking agenda from the Government.

They expect a programme that will keep pace with the times and the challenges that they and their families face every day.

That is why is there is no room for complacency.

There is no room for sitting back and thinking that because progress is good that the job is somehow done.

There is always more to do.

And part of that work is staying connected with the electorate – both cities and regions alike – to understand voters’ aspirations and their expectation of government.

Both the Caucus and the party organisation have important roles to play in staying connected. 

My expectation of MPs is that they will work closely with the party to ensure that our connections with local communities are as close as they possibly can be.

Party membership remains at the core of this, and I know that growing membership is a key priority of the Board.

Encouraging more members to become active in campaigns is also important as we head towards seeking a fourth successive election mandate.

So as a party we have a lot of work ahead of us.

Fellow National party members, New Zealand is heading in the right direction.

The Government’s economic programme is laying the foundations for a stronger economy, sustainable jobs and higher incomes.

We are driving down crime and raising educational achievement.

We are lowering unemployment and lifting the bar on environmental standards.

National is starting its third term in Government with energy, focus and enthusiasm.

It’s important we continue to lock in and protect the gains we’ve made and keep making progress.

That takes constant hard work, oversight and judgement.

You have my strong commitment that I will do everything I can to lead a strong government and a strong National party as we face the next two- and-a-half years until the 2017 general election.

Thank you.
Ladies and Gentlemen, isn’t it great to be in the National Party?

This is my ninth annual conference as Leader and it’s as much a privilege today as it was back in 2007.

This is our first time together since the election last September – what a night to remember!

My thanks to everyone who worked so hard for that victory.

We have a fantastic team and it starts at the top – so please join me in thanking our hard-working President Peter Goodfellow.

Another person I want to acknowledge has delivered seven great Budgets, and this year his beloved Highlanders finally won the Super 15 – so join me in thanking my good friend and deputy Bill English.

On a personal note, I’m forever grateful for the unfailing support and encouragement of my family – Bronagh, Stephie and Max.

Winning a third term after such an unusual election contest was a great achievement.

So I also want to acknowledge the campaign team and its chair Steven Joyce.

Finally, I’d like to thank all our MPs, candidates, office holders and volunteers.

What a wonderful job you’re all doing.

In three elections now, New Zealanders have chosen us to deliver strong, stable government.

They trust us to deliver on the things that actually matter – like jobs, education and opportunities for their children and grandchildren.

And we are delivering.

Under this National-led Government, 74,000 jobs were created across the economy last year.

Was that a one-off?

No, because 82,000 jobs were created the year before that.

This Government is focused, energised and full of ideas.

Three weeks ago, we started free GP visits and prescriptions for children under 13, and I’m sure you’ll agree that’s a great way to help Kiwi families.

We increased paid parental leave and it’s going up again next year.

The centrepiece of the Budget two months ago was a $790 million package to reduce hardship among children in New Zealand’s poorest families.

That’s right – a National-led Government is the first to raise benefits for families with children in 43 years.

In the balanced way we do things, we’re also putting more work obligations on sole parent beneficiaries.

And we’re boosting childcare assistance for low-income working families.

Our new KiwiSaver HomeStart package began on 1 April, and over the next five years it’s going to help 90,000 first home buyers into their very first home.

We’re tightening the tax rules for people who are buying and selling property just to make a quick profit.

And anyone who’s registered a car lately will have had a very pleasant surprise – because ACC levies have fallen and they’re going to come down even more.

We’re rolling out fast broadband into small towns and big towns right across the country.

And because we recognise the importance New Zealand families place on health and education, we’re putting almost two-and-a-half billion dollars more into these areas over the next four years.

All this is possible – in fact it’s only possible – because of good economic management.

New Zealanders can see our country is on the right track.

You’ll recall in 2008 I stood in Westpac Stadium in Wellington and said that 35,000 people – the capacity of that stadium – were leaving each year to live in Australia.

Well, do you know what that figure is now?

It’s next to none.

That stadium is now empty, bar a few people rattling around in the changing rooms.

Kiwis are staying in this country – and coming back from Australia – because they want to live, work and raise their families right here in New Zealand.

National’s policies are making a difference.

Take our reform of the welfare system, which is now focused on what people can do, not what they can’t do.

I’m proud of the fact that the number of sole parents on a benefit is now the lowest since 1988.

I’m even prouder of the fact that 42,000 fewer children are living in benefit-dependent households compared with only three years ago.

That’s right, 42,000 fewer kids are living in a household that depends on a benefit.

Those are the stats.

But it’s the real people behind them we care about.

People who are trying to make a positive difference in their lives and the lives of their children.

This Government is backing them.

We’re also backing Kiwi businesses, through our business growth agenda, through sound economic management, and by getting our own finances into good shape.

While other developed countries are still racking up debt, we’ll be among the first in the world to start paying it down.

We’re keeping a tight rein on spending, because we know that taxes are paid by people who get up early in the morning to go to work.

And they’re paid by people who’ve had the confidence to invest in a business or farm.

We’re a Party that admires and respects that.

We know New Zealand’s prosperity is created by private sector businesses, large and small, throughout New Zealand – from Kaitaia to Bluff, from the West Coast to the East Cape.

Of course, New Zealand will always face global risks.

At the moment, we’re facing a drop in dairy prices, and uncertainties in Europe and China.

I feel for Kiwis affected by these events.

But the worst thing we can do as a country is talk ourselves into some sort of economic funk, when that is completely unjustified.

Opposition parties spend all their time talking their own country down.

But the truth is the New Zealand economy is fundamentally sound.

New Zealand isn’t solely dependent on dairy – or on China.

We export a whole range of goods and services to a whole range of countries.

Many of those markets are doing very well.

Tourism is a great example, where a record three million overseas visitors came to New Zealand last year and spent more than ever.

The lower Kiwi dollar will be a further boost to tourism and in fact to all export industries.

Lower interest rates will also help support the economy.

The services sector, which makes up around two-thirds of the economy, is expanding at a good pace.

The manufacturing sector, too, is in its 33rd consecutive month of expansion, a period which started almost exactly when the Opposition a manufacturing crisis.

Also, I believe we’re a much more resilient country than we were seven years ago.

The country is better placed to deal with global challenges and uncertainties – like those we’re seeing at the moment.

And New Zealand’s longer-term prospects remain strong.

The Asia-Pacific countries on our doorstep are becoming wealthier and they want the high-quality food we produce.

We have over three billion potential customers just one long-haul flight away.

Earlier generations could never have imagined the global opportunities opening up for New Zealand.

I want to lead a country that embraces those opportunities.

An open and confident country that backs itself on the world stage.

As I’ve said many times, we won’t get rich selling things to 4.5 million New Zealanders.

But we could by selling to 4.5 billion people overseas.

Our Party supports strong international connections.

We value the benefits that free trade agreements deliver and the opportunities they offer.

I back our farmers, our manufacturers, our ICT companies and in fact all our export industries to succeed.

If we can get an equal crack at world markets, we’re up there with the best in the world.

That opportunity is what free trade is about for New Zealand.

When the previous Government, with the full support of National, signed a free trade agreement with China in 2008, our annual exports to that country totalled $2.5 billion.

Since then, they’ve quadrupled and China is now our biggest trading partner.

That FTA has had huge benefits for New Zealand.

Just a few months ago, I was in Seoul to witness Tim Groser signing another free trade agreement – this time with Korea.

When that agreement comes into force, half our exports to Korea will immediately be tariff-free, and almost all the rest will follow.

I can tell you that the kiwifruit growers of Te Puke are going to be delighted when the 45 per cent tariffs they currently face are finally removed.

We’re also in the final stages of negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement.

TPP has been a big focus for our Government.

A successful conclusion will mean a trade agreement with a number of countries, including the giant economies of the United States and Japan.

This is something that successive governments in New Zealand, of both stripes, have been actively pursuing for many years.

That’s because it will mean better deals for Kiwi producers and exporters, better access to world markets, and better prospects for growing those markets in the future.

It will help diversify the economy through a broader range of trade and investment relationships.

And it will flow through to higher incomes and more jobs for New Zealanders.

New Zealand’s connectedness with the world is also about people coming to New Zealand to live and work.

Immigration benefits New Zealand because people coming here provide more of the labour, skills, capital and business links we need to grow.

A lot of people coming to New Zealand settle here in Auckland.

But as I go around other parts of New Zealand, mayors and employers often tell me they can’t get enough workers of the type local businesses need.

Southland, for example, is always crying out for workers in the dairy sector.

Across the whole South Island, in fact, the unemployment rate is a very low 3.6 per cent.

I can assure people that New Zealanders will always be first in line for jobs. That will not change.

And Auckland, as our largest city, will continue to grow.

But I believe we can do a better job of matching the needs of regions with available migrants and investors.

So today I’m announcing some changes to our immigration settings.

The first is aimed at encouraging people who come to New Zealand as skilled migrants to take up jobs in in the regions.

Around 10,000 skilled migrants get residence each year, together with their family members, and almost half of them come to Auckland.

We want to balance that out a bit, by attracting more people into other parts of the country to help grow local economies.

Currently, skilled migrants with a job offer get 10 extra points if that job is outside Auckland, and those points count towards the 100 they require.

From 1 November, we will treble that, and give them 30 extra points.

In return, they’ll have to commit to a region for at least 12 months – up from the current requirement of three months.

New Zealand also needs entrepreneurs to start new businesses, expand existing firms and create jobs.

So the second change we’ll make is to encourage entrepreneurs wanting to come to New Zealand to look for business opportunities in the regions.

Last year we launched an Entrepreneur Work Visa, targeting migrants who offer high-level business experience, capital and international connections.

Currently, people applying for this visa get 20 extra points if they set up a business outside Auckland, and that counts towards the 120 they require.

From 1 November, we will double that to 40 extra points.

Immigration New Zealand expects to approve up to 200 people next year under this visa.

With the changes we’re making, we expect to see most of these entrepreneurs setting up or growing businesses outside Auckland and creating new jobs across the country.

The third change I’m announcing will help employers find out faster whether New Zealanders are available to fill a particular vacancy, before they lodge a visa application with Immigration New Zealand.

From 1 November, they’ll be able to contact Work and Income directly to check availability.

This is a small measure, but it’s been really appreciated by employers in Queenstown and we’re extending it across the country.

The fourth announcement I want to make today is that the Government intends to provide a pathway to residence for a limited number of long-term migrants on temporary work visas in the South Island.

These people and their families have been in New Zealand for a number of years.

Their children are at schools. Their families are valuable members of their communities. And they are conscientious workers paying their taxes.

Their employers want to hold onto them because there aren’t enough New Zealanders available.

Around 600 overseas workers in lower-skilled occupations in the South Island have been rolling over short-term work visas for more than five years.

We envisage offering residency to people in this sort of situation, who commit to the South Island regions where they’ve put down roots.

We’ll set out the details of this pathway early next year.

Finally, the Government will consider a new global impact visa.

This would be targeted at young, highly-talented and successful technology entrepreneurs and start-up teams, who want to be based in New Zealand, employ talented Kiwis and reach across the globe.

There’s been quite a bit of interest in this idea and we’re going to look at it carefully over the next few months.

Ladies and Gentlemen.

Taken together, the changes I’ve announced today will contribute to a better balance in our immigration settings.

They will help spread the benefits of migration across the country, particularly in those regions crying out for workers, skills and investment.

As I said earlier, we need to be more connected with the world, because that’s where our opportunities come from.

This is just one small part of that approach.

We’ll also continue to press on with free trade agreements, build stronger investment links, and embrace the openness and connectedness that characterises successful countries in the 21st Century.

Fellow National Party members.

I’ve had the privilege of leading this great country for almost seven years, and what a privilege it is.

Under this Government, our country has a better set of books, higher incomes, more jobs, better education standards, safer communities, better and faster health care, and fewer people reliant on benefits.

As a team, we’re making a positive difference to the lives of New Zealanders.

Our country is stronger and more resilient.

More confident and more assured.

National has an amazing team of talented MPs from one end of the country to the other.

And we’re supported by thousands of members who work so hard for us.

I thank you all.

Our Party is in great heart.

And there is much more for us to do.

We’re a busy Government.

We’re a Government that’s ambitious for New Zealand, a Government that’s working for New Zealand, and I feel honoured to lead that Government.

Thank you.

It’s great to be here in the Waikato for the first of the National Party’s regional conferences.

Isn’t it fantastic to be part of a region that is so blue!

This year we get to celebrate the Party’s 80th birthday.

We do so with the Party in great shape, and looking forward with strength and confidence.

As the founding members got together in May 1936 they chose the name National because of their determination that the new party represent all parts of the community.

The name National also emphasised that the Party’s principles and policies were rooted strongly in New Zealand.

All these years later, those factors remain at the heart of our appeal.

The National Party seeks to represent the hopes and aspirations of urban and rural people alike; we have in our party both liberals and conservatives; and our members include New Zealanders of all ages and ethnicities.

The National Party represents the very many New Zealanders who believe in private enterprise, personal responsibility and smaller, better government.

With this talk of birthdays, I also want to acknowledge one of my predecessors, and a favourite son of this region, Jim Bolger.

Jim is in great form as he gets ready to turn 81 at the end of May.

He led the National Party for eleven years and continues to be there at the end of the phone for advice and wise counsel.

I also want to acknowledge the outstanding MPs in the Central North Island Region:

my Ministerial colleagues Simon Bridges, Anne Tolley, Todd McClay and Louise Upston
Senior Whip Tim MacIndoe, who has given himself leave and is on a well-earned break
Assistant Speaker Lindsay Tisch
and Parliamentary colleagues David Bennett, Jonathan Young, Scott Simpson, Barbara Kuriger and Todd Muller
Individually and collectively they do your electorates and our Party proud.

I don’t have time today to tell you about all their hard work, or to set out what they are achieving as part of the Government. We’d be here all day.

But I do want to take a moment to highlight the outstanding job Anne Tolley is doing as Social Development Minister.

I’m thinking in particular of the work she’s doing to get on top of the awful problem of child abuse and neglect.

The Child Youth and Family review that has recently been released, along with an extensive work programme already underway, will bring genuine change in an area that needs it.

Anne, can I tell you that your Parliamentary colleagues and Party members alike are right behind you.

I also want to acknowledge and thank our Party President, Peter Goodfellow.

We are very lucky to have him, and Peter I want to say in front our fellow Party members just how much we value the work you do.

Can I also acknowledge the members of the Board.

They have a very important job in governing the affairs of the Party and assisting Peter.

To regional Chair Andrew von Dadelszen and your team – thank you.

Thank you for leading what is such a strong and vibrant region, and one that makes such a great contribution to the National Party.

And to the delegates that are here from right across the region, you have my personal thanks for the work and passion you bring to our great Party.

Our Party might have been around for 80 years but all of you show the energy and enthusiasm of youth.

Every delegate here – along with the tens of thousands of members around the country – contributes to the ongoing success of our Party.

We’ve won three elections and had the privilege and responsibility of being in government.

But I don’t take anything for granted.

We need to keep working hard to make this country a better place for New Zealanders and their families.

By doing so we’ll be an effective government and we’ll make the next election a winning one.

Our public support remains high.

Our Cabinet and Caucus are as focused and unified as ever.

And the party organisation is in strong shape.

We continue to lead a stable government, which history tells us is no easy matter under MMP.

Our relationships with ACT, United Future and the Maori Party are all strong despite the fact that we don’t always agree with each other.

By contrast there are the Opposition political parties.

Let me say just one thing about Labour then I am going to quickly move on to talk about the positive work our government is doing.

In Labour we have an Opposition that is increasingly turning to the desperate politics of smear and innuendo rather than doing the hard yards of developing an alternative vision for New Zealand.

But New Zealanders can see through that.

Meanwhile, we are continuing to be relentlessly positive about New Zealand.

Our job is to do the right things for New Zealanders every day and every week, and to demonstrate by our policies and our actions – not just our words – that we are worthy of their continued support.

This year is my tenth as your Leader and my eighth as Prime Minister.

I am just as excited about the year ahead as I have ever been.

You have my absolute commitment that I will do my best and give my all in pursuit of the values and policies our Party has long stood for.

People don’t always have to agree with everything the Government does.

I’d be very surprised if that was the case.

Even Keith Holyoake was said to have only agreed with his own government around sixty percent of the time.

I remember a comment that former Australian Prime Minister John Howard made in a speech once, when looking back over the Liberals’ long time in government.

“Love us or loathe us,” he said, “and there were plenty of both, the Australian people knew what we believed in and what we wished to achieve for their country.”

That is the approach my Government takes as well.

We tell people what we’re trying to achieve, we set out what we’re going to do and we stick closely to our word.

The next step in setting out our future plans is the Budget on 26 May.

My friend Bill English has delivered eight good, responsible Budgets and this one will be no different.

It will be a strong Budget that has at its heart a focus on the economy, with initiatives to help ensure New Zealand achieves a strong level of growth for the years ahead.

The Budget will reflect the sound position of public finances.

It will highlight that we are on track to achieve the Government’s goals of a balanced budget and paying down debt.

Recently we announced a package of tax changes to reduce compliance costs and make tax simpler for small businesses.

We are reducing the burden of interest and penalties, and introducing a new pay-as-you-go option for provisional tax that will help up to 110,000 small Kiwi businesses.

Small businesses are the backbone of our economy, and this $187 million package will mean they can worry more about making their business successful and less about having to fit in with the needs of the tax department.

Feedback I’ve received tells me that these changes – particularly the reform of provisional tax – have been widely welcomed, and that’s great news.

Alongside a strong focus on the economy, the Budget will also ensure we keep meeting the needs of New Zealand families in key areas like health and education.

That has always been our priority.

And the economic and social sides of our agenda are closely linked.

Wealthier, growing countries have more choices and are in a better position to invest in more social spending for their citizens.

A strong economy means a strong health system, a strong law and order system, a strong education system, a strong defence force, and so on.

And a key part of our plan to achieve strong, sustainable levels of economic growth is being an open and outward-facing country.

You will have heard me say before that as a country we will not get wealthy selling things to ourselves.

99.9 per cent of the potential customers for our products live overseas.

That’s why free trade agreements are so important.

People of this region know this all too well, as many of you are involved in creating products and services for export.

Whether it is the dairy farmers of Te Awamutu, the kiwifruit orchardists of Te Puke or the tourism operators of Matamata’s world famous Hobbiton, this region relies on trade.

And trade is a long term proposition.

It takes time to build relationships, to build and expand markets.

In fact, trade relationships are usually so long term they transcend governments.

That’s why Labour’s decision to oppose TPP is so disappointing.

It breaks a long-standing bipartisan approach to trade matters, which has been vitally important for a country like New Zealand.

I am only recently back from a visit to China.

I can tell you that even with the downturn in dairy prices, our exports to China are going great guns.

Labour under Helen Clark and Phil Goff negotiated and signed New Zealand’s FTA with China.

They did so with the strong and public support of the National party I led in Opposition, and our votes made sure it became law in the face of implacable opposition from the usual suspects the Greens and NZ First.

During my visit to China I was again struck at the enormity of the opportunities for New Zealand.

Just take the example of tourism.

In the last year we had 368,000 visitor arrivals from China – and increase of 28 per cent over the previous year.

And those tourists stayed 38 per cent longer than the previous year, spending more money in the process.

What is more, this growth is set to continue into the years ahead – bringing in real money and creating real jobs for the next generation of young New Zealanders.

And it’s not just China. The Korea FTA is paying dividends as well.

So there is much to be optimistic of for the future.

But there is no room for sitting back and thinking that because progress is good the job is somehow done.

There is always more to do.

Both our MPs and party members have important roles to ensure that we stay connected to our communities.

Than you again for taking the time to attend and participate in this conference, and for all the work you do for our party.
Good afternoon firstly I just want to welcome Malcolm to New Zealand. Prime Minister it’s both significant and a great honour your first overseas visit as Prime Minister is to us here in New Zealand. We had a broad ranging discussion today on a range of, a huge number of issues. I think everyone’s aware that there’s been significant debate in New Zealand over the last few weeks about the issue of deportation and the rights of New Zealand’s at detention centres. So you’ll be under no surprise that was a significant part of the conversation, discussion that we had. I think I’d characterise that by saying the discussion was frank, it was honest and it was constructive. It’s the way you would expect friends to talk with these kinds of issues and the way family discuss those issues. We don’t hide away from them, they are what they are but we try and work on a constructive way through those. We also had good discussions about the rights of New Zealanders in Australia, I think the Prime Minister has got a couple of things he wants to sort of say about that. As you would expect from this relationship and because of the depth of it where there’s so many other things we talked about from our work together at Taji Air Base in Iraq, right through to some of economic issues that our two countries face. 

I suppose just before I hand over to Malcolm, I think its best he makes a few remarks he can sort of comment on I just want to take this one moment to say that a lot is said about the relationship between Zealand and Australia and we throw around the terms of being family and of the relationship from a New Zealander’s perspective and I think from Australia’s it’s the most significant that we have and I believe that to be the case. From time to time there will always be issues that we want to debate and we don’t always see eye to eye, it’s not the first time in the relationship between New Zealand and Australia that there have been points of contention or discussion, we’ve had that from everything from apples through to other issues.  

But two weeks ago I was in Taji Air Base, taking the opportunity to see our troops there and I think we can all be immensely proud of what they're doing there. Whether it's from the element of training,  through to force retention,  logistics, the medical,  Australian and New Zealand forces working together and what  is interesting is that in the various groupings and the things that they do, they're  intermingled together as one.  Not because the leadership is forcing them to do that, not because that was the plan that was set out to do that, because that is the right thing to do when family get together in an international location. And the only way you can tell that they are either Australians or New Zealanders is because of the nature of the fatigues that they wear. And I think that just speaks volumes of Australia and New Zealand.  

We compete on the sports field together. And I'm confident we may well be doing that at the World Cup final. But this is a  relationship that we highly value and cherish on the side of the Tasman. We had some great discussions today. You are a great friend of New Zealand, Malcolm. And I personally am more than happy to put on the record, I think you’ll not only be a fine Prime Minister of Australia, you’ll   be a long-term leader of Australia. And I think your  vision for the country, which is optimistic and it reflects the underlying strength of your  nation, is very akin to the view that I take over here so it's  great to have you over here and thank you.

From New Zealand’s point of view we’ve defined it as a two year mission of training Iraqi Forces. 

We committed to that two-year time frame. We think that makes sense in terms of a realistic contribution. We've trained over 2,100 forces and officers so far on a combined basis. My own view of what I saw actually is you can define it  as successful and it is working because what we're doing is  we're taking forces that are  fighting already, that come off the front line, they undertake  anything from sort of four to  six-week program and all the  advice we had both from the soldiers themselves actually and from our people, was that they leave  after that four to six- week period significantly upskilled.  So I think that's the definition of success.  Secondly, one thing we know about ISIL is their propaganda campaign is highly effective. Their use of social media, both to intimidate people around the world but actually to intimidate the very soldiers that they are up against and so one of the big roles of the Australians and New Zealanders is to detox the myths actually that are propagated by the ISIL people. So look, I think that  is all working. Will it be the long-term solution to Iraq? My view is: no. The only way through all of this is through diplomatic solution, and a political solution, and the reason for that is, bluntly, you can't kill ISIL at a rate that is going to stop them coming back. You can wound and you can degrade them but depending on how you undertake that, you can just breed another generation of people with grievances. In the end actually when it comes to Iraq, I think as Prime Minister Abadi has committed to, you have to find a place where the Sunni, the Shiites and the Kurds all feel as though they can claim Iraq as their home and live harmoniously next to each other. That's got to be the long-term goal, the degrading of ISIL is an important part of the future but the real future sits in politics in my view.
New Zealand does have an agreement actually with Australia that we'll take 150 people a year. That's been in place for some time. Australia hasn't exercised their right there [inaudible] but that's always an option that's available.
Could I just make a point on the broader issue? Look the way we would see it AS New Zealanders there's two particular points. One is about New Zealanders actually going to detention centres. We in principle don't agree with that. We don't think that they  really should be going to detention centres. There's been  a history of them being detained under the old legislation but  of course the numbers were much smaller and so the first thing that Malcolm's announced is the  fact that there will be more resource things will be speeded up and the law ensures that  anyone can come home immediately if you want to, so if you look at that, that should help us address the situation that when somebody's  visa is revoked, that happens early on in the process and actually they know the outcome  of that by the time they finished their sentence in prison and therefore they don't  need to  go to a detention centre. That's the first issue.  I think the second issue that we've really been raising, this whole point about a degree of compassion. We're not arguing these are good people. If they've been to prison for 12 months or more there is a very high probability they've committed a serious crime and Australia should have the right to be deport people if they want to. We have the same right in New Zealand and we exercise it from time to time. But what’s also true is because of the enormity of the flow of New Zealanders to Australia, in  reality and because of the  carve-out that took place on the special visas from 2001, there's just a lot more New Zealanders in Australia who would be in that category where they can't necessarily get  residency and therefore citizenship and so our main point really has  been to say look there are some people for whom they've  committed these crimes but   actually their community of interest is in Australia, they came when they were very young, and maybe their crime isn't as significant as others. What the Prime Minister pointed out rightfully so is that there is an appeal process that can be exercised by the minister and ultimately by the courts if required. And actually, as they've been processing those   at the moment, there have been successful appeals made by New Zealanders. And so all I've  tried to implore upon the Prime  Minister and the Australian system is that where someone isn’t the highest risk where someone has a long-

term community of interest in Australia, I think in the spirit of mateship, there should be some compassion shown, and I hope that the minister who's responsible,  Minister Dutton, will take that  into account , and history says so far that they are actually on the basis of some of the  appeals that have gone to the minister.
As a starting point, it's a very easy and natural friendship and relationship. It's pretty plain for everyone to see that we have similar paths in terms of our working life prior to coming to Parliament. I suspect if you were to ask us to answer a series of questions on both economic and social issues, you'd find a high degree of alignment. We're both economic conservatives. I think we're both pretty socially liberal. We both lead centre right parties that represent very broad constituencies. We're both dedicated to our families and we're both by nature sunny optimistic people. And I think that that's got to be a recipe for a relationship that works well. And look in the end, it's not for me to really give advice to any leader, but the only thing I would say to Malcolm is to carry on doing what he's doing, because Australia is an amazing country, it's got an abundance of natural resources, it's got hugely talented people, it attracts people from round the world, it's got an amazing climate, and I personally believe, as we see Asia continuing to grow and develop and do well, Australia and New Zealand will be enormous beneficiaries of that. We've got to stay open in the world, open to trade, open to advancing innovation, science, technology and all of those different issues and I think people vote for hope and for a brighter future. I don't think they vote for negativity. In all the public comments I've seen Malcolm make so far, that's exactly what he keeps talking about. If he keeps doing that, I suspect he will be very successful.

In terms of detention centres, no. The reason for that is manyfold. Firstly I think on the back of the announcements that we've heard and the resources that will be committed I'm reasonably confident that the number of New Zealanders spending time in detention centres other than them wanting to do that and not return to New Zealand because they’ll have the right to do that will diminish significantly over time. Secondly, we have a very consistent message for New Zealanders that are in detention centres. And that is that we will provide for them through the ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade consular support. If they have any concerns about any issues that they face, they should reach out and speak to our people and we will follow up on that and secondly my experience of Australia is that it is a country that is bound by a very good legal process. So there is a review process that takes place. It is independent. If people have concerns, they need to make those concerns known in and the  independent review will take place. On the wider issue of the plight of New Zealanders in Australia, look we've seen some gradual progress over time. No-one's arguing that it's the biggest wins of all, but you have seen some over the course of the last 12 months. Today's announcement is a welcome one. We continue to talk about that issue. And I just hope over time, again, that we can make some more progress for those New Zealanders. My main overall argument actually is I think the right one from our point of view. New Zealanders are added value to Australia. Per equivalent population of the Australian people, more New Zealanders are in work, more New Zealanders earn more, and less of them are incarcerated. You know we are lifters in the Australian economy, we are not leaners. We don't go to Australia looking for a free lunch. New Zealanders go there with the expectation that  they'll work and add value to Australia and my experience of the 25,000-odd Australians who come over to New Zealand every year is they are great contributors to our economy and we welcome them over. We think they make great New Zealanders and as long as they barrack for the right rugby team we're happy to have them there.

The Government joins with the Leader of the Opposition in relation to the motion that he has just presented about Helen Kelly. Helen Kelly did not come from my side of the political fence. There were many occasions when I simply did not agree with her, not the least being, actually, her disagreement with the Government's view that the law should be changed in relation to the definition of a contractor, so movies like The Hobbit series could be made in New Zealand.

Sometimes the forceful way that Helen Kelly made her arguments frustrated me, but she also had my enormous respect. She was passionate, she was tenacious, she was articulate, she was intelligent, and she was pragmatic. Underneath all of that she had a great sense of humour and was always prepared to at least sit down and have a discussion to see if the rights and interests of New Zealanders could be advanced. As Mr Little has just pointed out, not the least of this was in relation to the Job Summit, where I think the country had genuine concerns about what might happen to workers in this country, and she fought to see whether there was a way to preserve their jobs and their entitlements.

Helen Kelly cared passionately about those whom she fought for, and she believed in them to the end. She died far too young and she had a great deal more to contribute. I think most people know that Helen Kelly was considering a career in politics. If she had not been struck down by such a terrible illness she would have enjoyed, I think, the opportunity to debate in this House those values and principles that she held so dearly, and we would have enjoyed debating with her. But the truth is, Helen Kelly did not need an office in the Beehive to make a difference to New Zealand; she made that all too easily through the capacity of her arguments and the way that she articulated them.

To her family and friends we pass our deepest condolences. May she rest in peace.
