Not at this point, but we have got a plan, and the plan is to say, 'Here's our target at the moment,' which we actually think is thoroughly credible, because Simon Upton himself said New Zealand's in this very unique position of being a developed country with a developing country profile. So I think a reduction of 30 percent of the 2005 base is credible, but I think we need to do more if and when we can find solutions to that agricultural portion, and I'm absolutely confident we will. The scientists who are working on it tell me they're getting closer, and there's a lot of money being thrown at that.
Again, over time. I don't think they will. I don't think people are going to go there and say, 'I was offering a 30 percent reduction off a 2005 base. I tell you what, I'll make it 35.' I think it's going to be more about, 'Here's the direction of travel and no more of a 2 degrees increase, all of these sorts of things, and here are how the rules play around deforestation or whatever it might be.'
Yeah.
Well, we'd like to— I don't know whether you'd say it's actually a war in a way that New Zealanders would think of a war, because it's quite different. We don't have troops fighting them. We have troops training the Iraqi soldiers. And they're a terrorist group, so it's a little different, but some people could use those terms and would probably be appropriate in doing so.
Well, some— It wouldn't be the way I would probably describe it, but what I would say is our job is to ultimately, if we can, be part of a coalition that will initially, if we're realistic, degrade the threat of ISIL and over time eradicate ISIL, but we know that's very challenging. We know that they move and reconfigure themselves. There are a lot of groups, for instance, who aren't actually technically ISIL, but they want to associate themselves with it because they believe that gives them mana.
Well, that's a fair point, but I guess the issue here is what are we doing in Iraq? The answer is training Iraqi forces to give them more capability. So we're doing two things from what I've observed when I was actually there. One is make them better soldiers, and that's definitely working. And the second thing is actually debugging some of the myths that these soldiers really believe from the propaganda that they see from ISIL through social media. So the point is – in two years, will the job be done? Realistically, probably not, but I genuinely don't believe we should be there forever. You could potentially be in Iraq for an awfully long time training their forces.
Well, that's genuinely not my intention. I honestly believe that we're going there to make a contribution, to make their forces stronger, but I think there should be a starting and ending point, and for me I feel comfortable at two years.
Oh, no, it was a genuine attempt to make sure that people understood what Labour were doing, which is— I walked into the House, right, that particular day, and, in my opinion, there was a set-up from Kelvin Davis and a camera, and he started shouting at me that I was gutless. And to be blunt—
Well, I've been standing up for New Zealand— My point is I've been standing up for all New Zealanders. All Labour has done, and, actually, in my opinion, the other Opposition parties as well, is—
Yeah, well, my— If you look at the whole context of everything I said there, I made the point very strongly and which I stand by, that, in fact, actually, I've been representing, I think fairly, all parts of this debate, you know, fundamentally the New Zealanders that could be subjected to these people when they come back, because some of them are potentially quite dangerous individuals, and that's why we've had to change the law and put monitoring on them and all these sorts of things.
Yeah, because, actually, people have been coming back from Australia for a very long period of time over successive governments. It's not new. What's new is late December of 2014, the Australian government changed the threshold, and that increased the amount of people coming.
But it's actually not new that people have been coming back.
No. No, I don't agree with that. What's changed is the sheer volume changes the situation. And we've already had, actually, extended supervision orders and public protection orders which our government has been involved in.
Yeah, but we've made substantial changes, including extensive supervision orders and public protection orders, which can be applied to the most serious of people. I mean, the situation—
No.
No, I don't, actually, because we've had to be somewhat reliant on Australia, both in terms of the flow of information, understanding who was coming back, whether we thought we needed to change, and, actually, that flow of information was quite slow out of Australia.
Yeah, well, all of that's been there. There's a big range. For a lot of them they will, but it depends on their individual circumstances, but the abatement's tiny.
It depends. Every circumstance is different, but, okay, if you go and have a look at what we've done as a government in the time we've been there, a) in the worst times and in the most difficult of conditions, we actually insulated everyone by maintaining Working for Families, by maintaining benefits and entitlements. Actually, a lot of other countries changed, said, 'We can't afford it,' and they changed. We didn't do that. The second thing we've done is we've increased the benefits for the first time in 43 years. And the third thing we've done is we're putting more money into, for instance, really low-income housing, more people getting a chance to get accommodation supplements. And the last thing we've done is we're growing the economy, and you are seeing quite a substantial reduction in the number of people on a benefit. I think it's 30-odd thousand the rest of the time.
Well, growing the economy is the fastest thing we can do to move people out of poverty.
I think we will refute your stat, but we could spend all day arguing about those. No doubt that Auckland house prices have been going up reasonably rapidly, and there's a number of reasons for that, but I think you've also got to look at a few things. Firstly—
I reckon it is. For a start off, you have a look at what's been happening in housing, we've got the highest level of construction we've had in 10 years, so that's good. We've now got 106, I think, special housing areas in Auckland, and they are going to deliver a huge number of homes over time. I was in Hobsonville this week. Okay, they've just delivered their 500th house. They're going to deliver 3500 on that site.
It is going gangbusters, as is a hell of a lot of Auckland.
Well, firstly, I reckon we should be celebrating that particular stat. I mean, honestly, do we want to be in a country—?
Maybe, maybe, but maybe or maybe not. It has some effect on—
It has some impact on housing. There's no question it has some impact on housing, but overall, actually, what's happening is New Zealand and particularly Auckland, but New Zealand, is an attractive destination to come to. When I was the Prime Minister, 40,000 people crossed the Tasman and lived in Australia. We were worried about as a country people leaving—
Yeah.
Because, as I said, the reason sometimes you can't absolutely say what the impact is, is that a lot of these people that come here come on a work visa that sees them in the construction sector, maybe in the engineering sector, actually growing our economy. So do you want to say to a young entrepreneurial IT company, 'We're not going to allow you to bring in the very bright computer programmer from somewhere because we need to build a few more houses in Auckland'? We need to build more supply in Auckland; we're doing that.
Not at all. In reality, poll numbers will always move around a bit anyway, and you're really talking at the margin. I'm moving around about a percent. But, look, in the end that's not the important issue, is it? National's polling as a party 47 percent broadly. And every poll's a bit different. I mean, look, we poll every week—
It's not. Sadly, it's not all about me, no.
Well, every poll is different and you get different outcomes and—
Well, it's moving a bit. It's moving a percent, okay. The leader of the Opposition—
Okay.
Okay, so there'll always be a range of different things. You can pick your poison. It's not for me to analyse always, but you're still saying numbers—
Okay, you can pick.
For the most part. There's always going to be some—
Yeah, because I could list you a dozen things as well that the Government's done that have been really good – getting back into surplus, as I say, record numbers of people coming to New Zealand wanting to be here, a growth rate that's higher than most other countries, very high participation rate in terms of employment. I can go on all day on these things. There's a list of things. Of course there's some things that either you wish hadn't happened or you could do a little bit better or the interpretation might be a bit different, but that's life.
No, the worm-gate— the worm farm situation. But sometimes, actually, in government you're under pressure to do a lot of things in a hurry, get information out in a hurry. It kind of is what it is.
So, he's been in that position since 2008. In every election – you go back and look at the coverage – in every election he's got up and said, 'I'll be the kingmaker.'
Well, what I said in 2014 was I thought we could work with him. We changed our position. I suspect that'll be what will happen in 2017 – a similar position. But I just make the point – every election I've been in – '08, '11 and '14 – every time I've been there, the commentators have said Winston Peters will hold the balance of power. In '08 he didn't. In '11 he was gone. In '14 on the night we governed alone.
Look, we're two years from an election. As I said in '14—
Well, what I said in 2014 was I thought we could work with him. We changed our position. I suspect that'll be what will happen in 2017 – a similar position. But I just make the point – every election I've been in – '08, '11 and '14 – every time I've been there, the commentators have said Winston Peters will hold the balance of power. In '08 he didn't. In '11 he was gone. In '14 on the night we governed alone.
Thanks, Lisa. No problems.
Well, I think that's the, sort of, $64 million question or maybe the 1.35 billion question, given the number of people here.   I mean, what we know is we produce what they want to buy.  That's the really good news part of the story.  Fundamentally, they want food, whether it's ultimately aquaculture or dairy, meat, it doesn't really matter.  They want that food.  They want the quality of that food.  They want the assurance that the food will be of a standard that they expect.  Secondly, they want to educate their children, and they want to come and travel.  And there are specialist areas where it can be a niche in the Chinese market, like, say, Rakon is to New Zealand, for instance.  But in this market, you know, a niche can be a very, very big order for New Zealand, so there's lots of potential.
Well, I think the good news part of the story is, I mean, we're here and we promote this relationship and the trade aspects of this relationship because we genuinely believe it means better jobs, it means more jobs, it means, you know, greater opportunities for New Zealanders.  I mean, the challenge always for New Zealand, I think, is a) making sure that we maintain our brand and quality, maintain margin so we make money, and the second thing is we don't want to become solely China dependant. I mean, this is a market that could at one level buy everything New Zealand produces, but the reason we go to Latin America, as we did a few weeks ago, or we sell to other markets and focus on them is that in our history, we've been solely-
Absolutely.  Well, you go and have a look at the United Kingdom.  You go back to the, you know, 1970s before they went into the European Common Market.  We essentially produced food for Britain.
I don't know if that's entirely true.  I mean, we have a great relationship with the United States.  I mean, arguably, our relationship with them is in the best shape it's been for a very, very long time.  They're also our third-largest market.  They've gone past China, but they're a very big market.  I mean, what New Zealand should be trying to do and what the Government is trying to do is make sure we have a diversified number of markets we sell to.  So to your point - I mean, you can't rule out that there is a problem one day in China, in their economy, because economies go through those issues.  We've had an Asian financial crisis before.  But what you've also got to say is this is a wave of reform that this is one in a generation, and we're uniquely placed to ride that wave.  You pose the question really, about New Zealand and China, but it's interesting to look at the US-China relationship.  The US is also focusing itself far more heavily in this market.  You've got President Obama now coming to the East Asian summit and APEC, you know, every year.  That's a huge commitment for a US president, and what that shows you is that, you know, I think there's a lot of people and a lot of countries that are starting to say, 'Well, if this is the growth-'  This is the engine for growth, and it's, sort of, no longer Europe, as it was, for instance, and even the United States starting to come back with having issues.  We have to be focused on this set part of the world, otherwise we're missing an opportunity.
We may not always see eye to eye on every issue, but the fact of having a closer trading relationship means we're more likely over time to understand each other a little more, and, you know, there have been improvements in human rights in China.  I'm not arguing that they're, you know, absolutely perfect, for instance.  I mean, there will be more gains that they can make.  But the internationalisation of the world - you know, economic evidence shows you that it's likely to make the world a safer place.
Well, I mean, if it got out of control for any country - let's not, you know, solely have that with China - New Zealand always reserves the right to change its law, so that's the first thing.  So we have rules that any investor has to go through, whether they come from Germany or-
No, what I said to them is, actually, the evidence doesn't support at the moment that there is enormous holdings of- of foreigners holding rural land in New Zealand.  That's the most recent data that we've released.  Now, what I have said to all of them, whether it's the president or the premier or the vice premier, as we met today, as I've had in my public speeches, you know, I've said there are areas of investment which we think are win-win for both countries and make sense, and there are areas that are more sensitive.  And, I mean, in the end, that's the same consistent message we give around the world.
Plenty of Americans who buy, absolutely.  So again the same thing - we have those discussions with, you know, the New Zealand-US Partnership Forum, and we encourage-
Well, if we thought it was at a level where we really believed that we needed to raise that, and I don't see that as being the big issue at the moment.  But if it was at that level, absolutely we'd have that discussion.  I mean, in the end, we're a sovereign country who make the rules of what we think is important to New Zealand.  My only real point around investment is, actually, we welcome investment from other parts of the world, you know, as much from China as we do from other places, because in the end, we need that capital to grow the value of what we're producing and grow jobs.  So if we're mature enough to understand that, then we should be brave enough to say we would rather have that directed.
Yeah, I mean, look, in the perfect world - if I was to live in the perfect world - that report would have been released early next week.  It was our intention to have an intelligence committee meeting on Tuesday night so we could do, I think, the decent thing and try and make sure the Opposition parties could understand the report first-hand before it went public and on Wednesday hold a press conference and go through it.  In reality, it doesn't change much.  It just meant I had to slightly change my schedule here, scramble a little bit and didn't necessarily have the report with me-
Yep, I think it is.
I think there's two issues.  One is GCSB prior to the 2003 Act were always doing this sort of activity.  It may have increased a bit more over time, but they were doing it. Helen Clark challenged when the law came in, 'Are you sure we can actually do this?'  And the advice she got was, 'Yes, you can, and it's consistent with what we see operating around the world, and these agencies work around the world.'  So I don't think- what's now happened is that as part of the rewrite of the NZSIS Act, essentially the Inspector General has started, you know, earlier in July - I was aware in July - but started raising questions about, 'Well, how does this actually work?  I need to do some thinking about whether this is actually really right.'  It's still very unresolved.
No.  No.
It could've, yeah.  See, the second thing is that there was no red flag - nothing came along that said said- and, in fact, as the report said as the minister, I'm entitled to expect that operationally they operate within the law, that they do their job.  So there was no- you know, the Dotcom case was a case where, you know, it went wrong.  They got it wrong.
But what it brought to the- it highlighted was there's an issue here.  And so that was-
Yeah, so I think the point you'd have to say is a) as the report says, I'm entitled to rely on the operational running and whether their compliance procedures are right and all that sort of thing, I'm entitled to rely on others.
Oh, absolutely.  I mean, when the Greens start saying they don't need this and they don't need the NZSIS, they are in la-la land.  I mean, to be perfectly frank, we need to make sure that for national security reasons this organisation operates professionally-
Yeah, but my job is to restore that, and all I can do is say when we've undertaken what is, you've got to say by any definition, a very thorough review, we're now going to implement that review.  There's been lots of changes already.  There's been a significant beefing up of both the compliance and the legal capability within GCSB, and there will be legislative changes to make sure that we support that.
Well, my point is this - look, if you really take a step back, the modus operandi of Labour and the Greens is to cast me as the villain, to call me names, to run sort of hit-and-run campaigns-
Okay, but let's put that in a bit of context.  If you take the situation where Ian Fletcher was appointed, so, you know, we had significant media coverage and, you know, a lot of very, very& highly critical claims being made personally directed at me, right?
I was asked a specific question in Parliament not with any warning, as a supplementary question, didn't even know it was coming, it bore very little relation to the primary question at the end of a parliamentary question session, and, actually, the answer I gave was perfectly correct.  Now, if the test is I've got to give you absolutely all of the full information - it comes back to the point I was making last week - then I need to actually slow that process down so that I can be- you know, I can meet the people's expectations-
Well, firstly, it wasn't at all media, and secondly, the point is that my view was that there wasn't balance on the way that that was being reported. I mean, you had the State Services Commissioner coming out totally supporting what I was saying, and, actually, that wasn't always fully covered in that way.  My reputation matters to me because, you know, I am honest and I am up front.  I also am way more accessible than virtually any other leader in the world, so if you want to go and ask other leaders, you have a limited number of questions, you have lots of warning what they're going to ask them about, they have lots of time to prepare questions.  I do two or three stand-ups a day, and I'm asked questions about a huge number of issues. 
Well, look, you know, the thing is I'm actually enjoying it.  As Prime Minister, what are they going to remember when they look back?  And the answer is going to be is the economy strong, does the education system work better, does health system work better, is New Zealand a stronger, more confident country?  I've been Prime Minister for four and a half years.  My own personal view is that we are building that sort of New Zealand.  Now, you know, is there perfection?  There will never be perfection in politics, but you can do your very best and you can see the course, and that's what we've done.  I really believe passionately that- And again, I've read lots of stuff in the media that I'm not going to be there in 2014, I'm not going to run National in the election, that's not true.  None of that is true.  I'll be there.  As long as National wants me there, I'll be there in 2014.  Why?  Because I don't think we've actually finished the job yet. And, you know, there will always be some weeks that are better than others, but for the most part I'm in an incredibly privileged position.  You know, I'm the 38th prime minister of New Zealand, and I'll always be grateful to the New Zealand public that they gave me that chance.
Thanks very much.
Well, I think the way you categorise it is they do think they're making progress.  I mean, that's one of the things that came through in the Defence Department is that they do think that they are getting some traction, but they don't underestimate the size of the challenge.  And I think everybody ultimately wants to leave Afghanistan, but we want to leave it in a condition where it's not a safe haven for the likes of Al Qaeda.  We've all invested far too much time, and a lot of people have lost their lives there, and I think we owe it to those people who have served so gallantly there that we don't actually abandon ship.  And from New Zealand's point of view, we've got to see that through. 
No.  I mean, I think there's a recognition that, you know, it's a place that's cost a lot of money and it's cost an awful lot of lives.  But on the other side of the coin, you go back to the very reason why they were there in the first place, and that was Al Qaeda and Osama bin Laden, and I think you can see by the amount of store they put into the fact that they finally killed Osama bin Laden that that's been a very important part of the story here.
Well, I don't know.  I mean, in the end, you know, it's not for me to sort of second-guess whether they did the right thing or the wrong thing from a financial perspective.  I think they did it with the right intention, which was, you know, in the end, 9-11 was, you know, a tragedy for everybody, and the US knew they had to deal with that situation and that they just couldn't afford to have a failed state like Afghanistan there, and so they've gone and taken some leadership there.  But, look, what we know is this is the United States - it's now in a very different position than it was when it first went into Afghanistan.
Oh, economically very different.
What I think - if you just read the papers, I mean, and just see the sorts of stories that are coming out, it's quite clear that they're bumping up against their debt ceiling.  They've got 10 days now to meet their target and come with a solution.  But, you know, ultimately the United States is going to cut expenditure.  That's been made quite clear, and so one of those areas is defence, which you see talked about in the media constantly now.  What that means, I don't know, but it's pretty- it's been a very expensive war for them.
No, that's never been raised.  I mean, what comes through constantly is they're really appreciative of the role we've played and they see it as a serious commitment.  One of the things that's come through quite clearly is the SAS are seen what they are - an elite and world class fighting forces that's played a critical role in mentoring the CRU - the Crisis Response Unit - and allowing for the transition.  I mean, that's where the objective here is - it's to put rule back into the people- the hands of the people of Afghanistan and allow them to be able to manage that.
Absolutely.  Look, I made that decision to send the SAS back to Afghanistan.  I made it with my eyes open, and I made it very clearly and deliberately, and it was because I believed that New Zealand had to demonstrate that it was taking its responsibilities seriously as it came to being global citizens.  And I'm pleased we made that decision, because I think we really have made a difference there, but the time for our men to be serving in Afghanistan in terms of the SAS has to come to an end because at one point, they're only a small unit, and they need to regroup and need to have some time back in New Zealand.
I wouldn't put directly in those terms.
Oh, well, it depends who you talk to, but, I mean, the way I would look at it-
Yeah, well, you know, I'm not going to characterise each and every meeting.  All I can say there is that we put those things on the table for good reasons, and when we come to town as leaders to have discussions with our various counterparts, and, you know, if you don't put things on the table, then you don't make progress.
Oh, look, I think, you know, in this case it's largely symbolic, but I think in the long term, you know, it's just another demonstration that the relationship continues to go from strength to strength.  I mean, it's not the critical part of the relationship.  That is trade and TPP.  It's the role of the economy-
Well, the Coastguard wouldn't fall in that category.  No one's questioning that the Coastguard would be nuclear-powered.
Well, I can't be sure of that, but all I can say to you is that we didn't ask for a response in that area.  We put it on the table.  I'm glad that we have.  I mean, progress might not be made in day one or day two, and if it never happens, well, that doesn't make any real difference, but this is a relationship that's going from strength to strength, and we do things and we're making progress.  And, you know, in the end, that's why leaders come to town.  I mean, otherwise everything would be debated by officials, and it would operate at glacial speed, with all due respect.
I don't think so.  I think for New Zealanders it's part of who we are and what we are, and, you know, I don't think we need to spend any time debating that.  I think, you know, in the end, this relationship with the United States is a mature relationship.  It's steeped in history and underpinned by shared values and principles.  And at the end of the day, we spend our life arguing about something that, you know, we signed off on 25 years ago.  I think New Zealand was right to do what it did then, and I'm not going to debate the merits or otherwise on the US side.  In the end, that's not the important point.  The important point is that, you know, as two countries, we're working together on the big issues and the world is becoming a smaller place, not a bigger place.  And what the United States know - that in New Zealand not only do they have a good friend, they know they've got someone they can rely on and someone that they form a strategic partnership with in a part of the world that they're very interested in now.  I mean, all eyes are turning on Asia and the Pacific.  It's not just New Zealand that's looking in that direction.  The United States is as well.  And it's reciprocal.  I mean, we know that we can rely on the United States.  We have a relationship with them that is quite different from almost any others than those that you would logically think of, like Australia and the UK and Canada.
I certainly haven't raised it with the parliamentary select committee.
Well, because that committee hasn't met for that purpose.  That's not the- We wouldn't share that level of information.  Not all of those members will have that level of security clearance for that sort of thing.  I mean, that committee meets and debates legislation.  Now, there may be members of that committee that have understanding in that area, but certainly not the committee.
Phil Goff was briefed, yeah, that's right.  I personally didn't brief him, but my understanding from the director of SIS, Warren Tucker, is that he was briefed and he was shown the same note and report that I saw.
Yeah.  It closed on- I probably won't tell you the day, but it's closed.
Well, look, it's very, very hard to know whether that is genuinely a SIS agent.  There were things that were written in that newspaper report that are just factually incorrect.  And so, you know, unless somebody is deliberately putting that information there to try and hide their tracks, then we don't know that it's really an SIS agent.  I mean, at the end of the day, I think that we did the right thing from a New Zealand perspective.  We had to take their actions seriously because, you know, it was just a little odd in the way that they left the country and the way that, you know, journalists and others got excited by the issue and said it was worthy of examination.  We did the same thing as well.  At the end of the day, we found absolutely no links whatsoever that they were anything other than what they portrayed themselves to be.  And there's a lot of sort of misinformation that's been put into the public debate.  People have criticised me for not immediately-
Look, I tell you what the challenge is here, and it comes with the territory, and that is that we have a lot of things that we deal with which are sensitive in nature.  And the standard position from pretty much every prime minister has been that we don't comment on issues of national security.  Once we start doing that, we compromise the very people that might undertake that work, we compromise lots of different things.  Now, you know, that's fair enough, and so we've had situations where we have talked about things, like Helen Clark talking about the passport scandal that took place with the Israelis.  That was a genuine proven case.  I mean, this was a scenario where, actually, people did have a look.  Our SIS and police did look into the situation and found nothing.  So, look, at the end of the day, I mean, I realised by the morning, you know, the impression that I had left wasn't sustainable.  If I replayed the video and did it all again I'd probably start where I ended six hours later, but it comes with the territory.  Sometimes you don't get it perfectly right in the first moment.
Well, the starting position I've always taken - it's the same one that the Minister of Trade is taking - is we don't sign up to agreements unless we think it's in New Zealand's best interests.  Now, that's always a component series of parts that come together.  You know, the sum of the parts is hopefully greater than the individual pieces.  So, yeah, of course we have to go and negotiate different aspects, but when it comes to the TPP, Pharmac hasn't been the issue that everyone's been pushing.  Intellectual property is an issue of concern, and that's because this is a knowledge-based economy, not a manufacturing-based economy.  It creates knowledge.
It wasn't really like that with Ron Kirk.  I mean, we had a really good discussion with him and there genuinely is forward momentum there.  They want to make progress.  We're working our way through the issues.
Well, look, by definition we're in the middle of the negotiation and so, you know, I can't run those negotiations through the media.  What I would say is, you know, I'm increasingly confident that we will get a deal done, but it's not without its challenges.  That means everybody puts everything on the table and starts negotiating our way through, but in the end, we're going to do what's in the best interests of New Zealand.  It's my view that Pharmac works extremely well.  So we didn't get into the weeds into the particular issues, but we did speak of wanting to complete a deal.  And, you know, I think New Zealanders can take a lot of confidence from the fact that we have some incredibly skilled negotiators, they know what they doing and Tim Groser, the Minister of Trade, has had probably the most experience at being the minister of trade we've had, so I'm confident we're going to come out the other end with a deal that's good for New Zealand. 
Potentially, some people would argue the Islamic State, insomuch that Assad is a more challenging issue, and in the end, while Assad has to go, there has to be a series of different institutions that can survive Assad. The very point that President Obama made in his speech about Libya was that in one sense, they got rid of Gaddafi, and that was great, but they left a whole lot of institutions falling over. But as I said yesterday, both of them are bad, and for a very long time we've been extremely critical of Assad. He's a guy that's used chemical weapons against his own people. But we've never argued that there should be regime change immediately; we've just been arguing that he has to go. And now both of them have to go.
Yes, in a way, although I don't think—what's happened with Australia is they were in a slightly different space to us. Their position, as I understand, was saying that Assad had to go straight away. We've never held that view. We've said he has to go but there can be a transition of him leaving power. So that's really if insomuch that there's a softening, that's probably it. In terms of the US, I'm not sure about their earlier positions, but Obama basically said on Monday that there would be some time frame. He didn't put a time frame on that, but he essentially gave at least the feeling that they're very much aligned with where we think things should go. But, look, in the end, the long term position for Syria is very poor, and it's not sustainable in its current form, because people can't live there. They can't live there either under ISIL, but they certainly can't live there under Assad. And they were pouring out of Syria long before ISIL started doing things. ISIL just filled a particular void that was there.
No, I think that's the Russian position. I mean, the Russian position is reasonably clear, and as I said, tactically, in the very, very short term, quite clever, because he says, 'Look, you're all opposed to ISIL. I'm opposed to the Islamic State as well.' So in that regard, he's getting everyone to line up behind him in the way against Islamic State. But that's not new either. We've all been opposed to them long before he said that. We've been in Iraq, trying to train forces to degrade the Islamic State. Essentially, though, the point about Assad and Assad going, I don't think he'll ever change his view. I mean, partly as I've been saying this week, what he's been doing, on the one hand, by turning everyone's attention on to ISIS is also, though, to turn around and try to strengthen and at least preserve his relationship with Assad and actually demonstrate to people that he stood by Assad. We just don't share that view, and we don't think it's sustainable, and I don't think the West will ever actually agree to support Assad, because over time, when we understand fully everything that's gone on, this is a leader that has, as I said earlier, used chemical weapons against his people. The West will never support that, the Americans never will, and actually, New Zealand won't either.
No. We have held the view for a long period of time and made the point, actually, in the past to both Tony Abbott and to the Foreign Minister that we think where they've set the threshold in terms of deportations is too low. I mean, they would make the point that these are still people that have been imprisoned for one year or more. My simple point is it's the same theme, really, as the rights of New Zealanders in Australia, that simply we have free-labour markets, so by definition, a huge number of New Zealanders go across the Tasman. We know that there's a better part of half a million, and the point we make to the Australians is yeah, we understand that you want to have these tougher rules in these areas, but actually, there has to be, I think, a degree of saying that because we have these free-labour markets… These people are virtually Australians. Let's be blunt. They're able to go across the Tasman at their will unless they have some sort of criminal record – historical criminal record. Then you've got to take a bit of the rough with the smooth, because we do a bit of that as well. Now, we do have the right to deport people, but it's at a much higher threshold. In terms of the Australians sending them to detention centres, that's caused, I think, technically because when people come out of prison, often they're appealing their case, and so there's nowhere, technically, to put them, would be the Australian argument. Again in the past, they'd go back into the community at some point. If they deported them, then they deport them. But now what's happening is they're taking a more hard-line view, and again, to me, for the most part, I think that feels pretty tough, and it simple comes back to – do we have a special relationship with Australia or not? In my view, the answer's yes. I don't actually think the Australian position's sustainable over the very long term, and we are going to encourage the Australian Government to consider the matter.
Firstly, we want a successful outcome, so the question is – how do you achieve a successful outcome? I think throwing our toys out of the cot is not necessarily going to achieve that in the short-term. I think it's far better, actually, for us to sit down with the new Prime Minister and to talk to through the issues, and we're going to have the opportunity to do that, I would say, in the very foreseeable future. We have been working on these issues for some time. In fact, I think we've been behind the scenes making some progress with the Abbott Government about the rights of New Zealanders in Australia. In the end, every country has a sovereign right to make their own rules and their own laws, and anyone that moves to that country, whether they like it or not, has to observe those laws if they want to go there. So I think our relationship with Australia, in a way, maybe it does mean that we deal with in a slightly different way, but it also means we're far more likely to get a better outcome, because we can go back and say, 'Here's the Anzac spirit. Here's all of these things.' We can play those cards.
We do the sorts of things we're doing. I mean, I've spoken to the Foreign Minister when I had an opportunity earlier this week on Monday. The Foreign Minister of New Zealand, Murray McCully, has been speaking to Julie Bishop for some time now. I'll raise the matter with Malcolm Turnbull. I've raised the matter before with Tony Abbott. It's a change of government. You've got to be a bit careful. We don't want to, sort of, force Malcolm Turnbull into a corner where he has to, sort of, pick and choose. You've got to give political leaders a chance if they're going to make nuanced changes to policies to do so in a way where they can preserve their dignity but maybe cut you a bit more space. It's got to be a chance that we can see some change there. I mean, Malcolm Turnbull's not known for being an unreasonable guy.
Don't know. We just haven't had those discussions in detail with them.
It might be, but we will need to sit down and have a talk to them about that. But it's not unusual for countries to have a carve-out for a particular manner. I mean, if you have a look at all sorts of rules that apply – I mean, you take investment into New Zealand, for example, the threshold out of Australia is the better part of, I think, around about $800 million. For every other country, it's around about, even with the Free Trade Agreement, around about 100 million. They vary a little bit. But there's a special level of the threshold for Australia. So it's not like this is unique ground, that they might somehow say, 'Because of the relationship between New Zealand and Australia, because we're almost one market together, we'll take a slightly different view when it comes to Kiwis.'
Not in terms of investor state. We're not worried about that. There will be investor state dispute provisions within TPP. We've had them in the last four FTAs. We've had—there's never been a case taken against New Zealand. I think it's highly unlikely that there actually would be. Most of the things that Jane Kelsey and those who support her say are factually incorrect. Or alternatively, they represent the actions that a country outside of New Zealand, you know, away from New Zealand might take, but we haven't.
Well, yeah, of course there's a horse-trading process going on at the moment. There always is in every FTA. We care desperately about making sure we improve the deal that's on the table with dairy. They care desperately about what's happening in the intellectual property and sort of pharmaceutical space.
No. The United States would probably see it as somewhat separated. They certainly want to see the extension of patents and corporates and the likes. They do want to do that, and we could live with some extension, but not, you know, we don't think a dramatic one. We also—you'd be aware, obviously, go away and have a look at what the financial impractical implications of all of these things are so that when we go out and say, 'We're only going to sign something if we think it's in the best interests of New Zealand', we don't, sort of, make that stuff up. We have models, and we have all sorts of assessment techniques. And everything I've seen so far allows me to continue to say I think that we are progressing towards something that would absolutely be in New Zealand's best interests. If it's not, we won't sign it. But we are at that crunch point with dairy, where we need to get more for New Zealanders if we can, and that's what we're working on.
Thanks very much.
Ah, well, no, I think
what I am going to do is take to Cabinet today a series of
proposals I think can give parents an
increased levels of confidence
I've always said that if the law doesn't work
then I would change it
important that we make sure that we can understand clearly
without bias whether
the law is working or not
so, you know, I think you can't ignore
when such a large number of New Zealanders
express their view didn't necessarily say
they wanted the law changed
and that they said quite clearly
they thought that if they smacked a child
in a minor or inconsequential
way that should not be something that sees them hauled
before the courts or their children taken off them
nor do I believe that would ever be the case
I think the current statistics support
that view that I hold
He said ... No, I don't think that's absolutely right
They said is, and that was the question, wasn't it
could you lightly smack a child
Maybe ...
but look you know as I've said
before, um, if you look at the statistics
the law has worked
um in the last sort of
year when it comes to
it comes to the situation of whether they've been
um complaints made about smacking
they've been 33 in the calendar year of 2008
of which there was one which proceeded to a prosecution
it was ultimately withdrawn
Well, what I'm going to ensure is that's
not the case and what I will tell you now is that's not the case at
the moment as I say there were 33
where there were complaints about smacking
one that almost lead to a prosecution
it was withdrawn
in the same time period 83,000 complaints
about domestic or family violence
I think we need to put it into perspective, my view
the law isn't perfect, but
put in there a compromise to ensure that in practise
that's what's actually important
Well you have to have a look at
through an enormous process that ah would
completely derail parliament, it's not as simple as people
 It would arguably be
an extremely explosive issue going back the other way
A whole lot of people.
A whole lot of people.
Well, like a lot of peo..
I don't think that's actually right
Well, it's a free vote, potentially
Well..
Potentially it could be
Ah, well not by lunchtime today
The law could be changed, there's no argument about that
my point to you is that, in in practise at the moment
the law is working, now
that doesn't mean that we can't put in additional safeguards
and that would be the process that I would support at this time
Well we never denied that we have um communications with a wide range of people, and the media landscape’s changing, so you know what I think some people do get confused with is they say well they can understand the mainstream media, um but they find it a bit odd with bloggers.

And and there’s a sort of a perception out there that somehow Cameron Slater is in a group of his own. You know the left have bloggers which are just as aggressive as Cameron Slater.

So you’re still communicating with Cameron Slater?

John Key: Well I haven’t in in recent times, but but the point is that if you look at it he’s not a big part of my day and bloggers are not a big part of my day, but what is true is that the landscape changes.

And just like if you look at your news, every night on your news you always say and you do on your Breakfast show all the time, go to our website, you know dub dub dub  dot tvnz dot co dot nz.

I’m doing it really well. I guess why you do that is your producers tell you to do that because you’ve got a massive audience and they want you to promote your site.

So all I’m saying to you is I live in a world where I can’t ignore that. A lot of stuff goes through blogs and sites and and politics is an aggressive business, so what ultimately happens is most of the time we’re defending.

I mean I know the Labour Party  want to act is if they’re a bunch of choir boys, but these are the people who sent their president to Australia to investigate me, hired private investigators.

They’ve done every rotten trick in the book and most of the time all we’re trying to do is make sure we defend ourselves against these baseless attacks.

So it’s the nature of politics and I don’t complain about it but it is reality, and for Nicky Hager to get up there and say it’s the National Party and everybody else ah you know great little, you know great little people and they don’t do anything wrong well sorry but it’s not reality.
Well I don’t have a terribly pro-active relationship with the guy now. I mean I don’t, you know don’t text him. If he texts me then you know I’ve responded to him on a few occasions.

Um but look in the end as I’ve said he’s never been a big part of my world. Yeah I could I could stop but I mean I even if I deleted his phone off the system it wouldn’t stop him sending me texts, he knows my number.

And lots of people do. And you might sit there and say well ok you could just change your phone number again. I’m on my fourth mobile phone number  as Prime Minister so and mark my words you would be amazed who gets my number, it’s just out there and people share it.
If you look at the current law and accept that there will be lots of interpretations within that law so there are as you probably know because you know more about it than I probably ever will, but if you look at that law, there’s lots of situations where an abortion is legally acceptable.
My guess is that’s probably right, a) because of the stats that you quote and b) while in theory there are examples that say ‘well it’s under this – it’s under 20 weeks gestation period but then it sort of goes into if there was a parent, sibling, orwhatever it is – there’s various legal things – but in the end I think it’s about the impairment on the mother and the child so in reality yes. So the reason I’m opposed to changing the law is that again, I think the law broadly works; I accept that it’s likely that the bulk of people that are terminating pregnancy are probably doing so on the basis that they – it’s an unwanted pregnancy and they feel that they can’t cope or don’t want to at that point in their life raise a child. So I think the issue there is that if you went to further liberalisation my concern I think would be that people would see that as a legitimate contraception device in a way that all of a sudden they would be more encouraged to go down that path and be less careful, so I’d be opposed to that.
But equally on the other side, I suppose my only point is that if you accept that there are probably plenty of 19-year-old girls that wander in and say I’m having – you know, I’m pregnant and I want to have an abortion and in the end they have that abortion, what would be the counter argument? And the counter argument might be that what is fundamentally a very young woman is raising a child and feels both mentally, financially and physically uncapable (sic) of raising that child and if you cast your mind back to the debate we had a little bit earlier, why do we think marriage is the best forum, putting to one side the legality of it, it’s because actually we know when you raise a child that is an immensely challenging thing to do. If you’re really going to raise a child well, children always through curveballs at you in my experience at every step along the way and actually if you don’t have someone to bounce that off against, it’s a lonely quite difficult process to go through. Lots of people do it and they do it very well. My mother did it by virtue of the fact that my father died when I was pretty young, but the reality is if you’ve got somebody else to bounce it off against and to support you and to play the different roles that have to be played, then that’s really beneficial. And I suppose my only point would be if abortion laws went the other way you would without doubt have more young people having children and the question is would they be in the best situation to cope with that if by definition they’re saying at the moment they can’t.
In principle yes and in principle. My preferred position is that for young women parental notification is sought.

I think in the end you know if your 16-year-old daughter turns up and she’s pregnant then in the end a whole lot of thoughts are going to be going through her mind, the capacity to actually cope with that situation and to actually make a sensible choice, whatever the sensible choice might be for their family and for the wider family unit. And actually one thing we know about young people is they’re terrified when they make a mistake, they often think there’s no coming back from a mistake and actually truthfully there is, because all young people will make mistakes of some sort whatever it might be.

That’s my view, so the only legal argument around not having that as an automatic right is just the fear that that could put at risk those young people – that’s always a subjective call.

I think it would take an overall reform of abortion law, and once you get into that space again you’re get into an area…
Yeah, Care of Children Act but – you could do it. It may become a conscience issue, I don’t really know but probably not I would have though but just in general that’s our preferred position yeah.
Oh yeah but look I’ve tried to give a bit of context around what actually happened there but um and I accept that that will be some people’s view, but there’s also another view, ah which is I should have been much better at reading that situation more carefully.

I completely failed to read that situation correctly, um I actually regret that very deeply. I regret it for the young woman in question.

Um yes I was kidding around and didn’t mean any offence um but that shows you the danger of you know um undertaking those sort of you know kinda pranks if you like that they can be misinterpreted and misread.
No I’m just saying that you know I have to take responsibility for my own actions. Um I completely misread the situation, clearly otherwise it you know wouldn’t have happened. Um and I just didn’t see it for what it was, um I did see it in a very light hearted nature, I’ve got a very casual relationship with the people there. We do have lots of fun. Um but…
And that’s of course that’s right that’s the counter argument, I mean looking…
Well, ah, if it was in the context of the way that it happened there I would see it in that context, but I absolutely one hundred percent appreciate um in hindsight she didn’t and I should have read that situation more accurately.
Yes I understand that’s some people’s argument. There’s a counter argument…
Well I was going to say there’s a counter argument for that and I think yeah look by nature I’m a pretty casual person, and I do kid around and have a bit of fun, and I think one of the things that look you know that, look the majority of staff there have enjoyed is the fact that…
…the opposite, rather than the power sort of thing and me being a bit stuck up I’ve, stuck up I’ve been mucking around and having a bit of fun, now you know ok look in the end I got that wrong and I have to accept that.
No because I didn’t intend to do that, it was the opposite, I intended to try and be in a much more informal sort of setting so that I put people at ease and we could have a bit of a laugh and a bit of fun so it’s really the opposite.
But I accept that that’s an interpretation someone could get.
Yes but I also have to take responsibility here for my own actions.
Well I mean look it was all just part of you know a a bit of jocularity was happening but you know it’s a very difficult thing, in the cold light of day when you look at these things, some things that are you know a bit of kidding round at the time, don’t seem that funny later on when they’re reflected on in the cold light of day. I see that and accept that now.
The country is definitely changing and from all the stuff I see and my gut feeling, I get it's definitely moving, No one remembers it. If that's the only reason why people are against it, don't worry about me getting any glory because I'm not going to,If the case is that it should stay there because it's always been our flag, well it's not the first one.
And [Australian Prime Minister] Tony Abbott has definitely nearly been put in front of the New Zealand flag as well.Of course it's not the most important issue...but as a country surely we can consider lots of different issues at once,rightfully so people would say I was taking their democratic right away,
