Yes.
Because, firstly, I think it is a well-accepted convention that the Prime Minister does speak for the Government across a range of portfolios. That is why the journalists ask me questions across a range of portfolios, and, actually, it is why the Opposition asks me questions every day across a range of portfolios. Secondly, I made that statement when I was overseas—I think in either Pohnpei or Laos—and the point I was making was that I was not entirely sure what statements Louise had made on her behalf, but she would have seen my comments, and if she had seen my comments, she would accept that I would be speaking for the Government.
Yes, I do, and I did not see the member making a comment yesterday when I gave what I thought was a pretty hard-hitting speech, actually, on domestic violence. The member criticised me for making that speech.
No, I think the Minister is being quite correct. The Government is still a party to the particular inquiry. Actually, I looked at the Minister's statements. The Minister's statements were quite hard-hitting in a generic sense, but she did not have the exact information about this particular case.
Yes. I think members opposite will know that I am always a very measured person.
I do not have all of the details, so I cannot tell you exactly the individual players' names. But in terms of discussions with the New Zealand Rugby Union, I think the rugby union itself—let alone me—has been making the very point that it thinks that this behaviour and the events of the Monday sort of "leer-up" are not a good idea.
Well, there is a range of portfolios that from time to time are outside of Cabinet. It just depends on who we think has the best skills, actually, to conduct those. But let us be honest. That member has been outside of Government for the entire time she has been in this Parliament, and maybe that does explain why she has done nothing since she has been here.
No, the Minister is free to discuss the matter, but she makes the correct point that she does not have the details.
Well, I am not aware of any Minister who has told the Minister for Women not to comment on this matter.
I disagree with the member that there is a housing crisis, but, of course, housing is a key area of focus for this Government and I have had a number of meetings with Ministers on housing and how it affects New Zealanders and their families. That is why the Government has a comprehensive housing plan to address the issue of rising house prices.
I would need to check the validity of the member's number. What I can say, though, is that the Government is moving more people into social housing more rapidly than we have seen for a long period of time and is providing nearly $2 billion in housing support and accommodation supplements. I am pleased to say, on a somewhat related issue, we have insulated nearly 300,000 homes across New Zealand.
The member is quite incorrect on both parts of his question.
What the Government has been doing for the most vulnerable New Zealanders in that area is making sure that they get the support that they need, and that includes the additional $50-odd million that we put into the Budget. We are seeing more people moving on to social housing—about 150 extra a week. But, of course, if the person that the member mentions does not have a house to live in, then I suggest that, in the first instance, they go to Work and Income, and Work and Income will be providing them with support.
That is the very point, is it not? When people go to see Work and Income, if they register that, for instance, they are in the most vulnerable of living conditions—a house or a tent—what in fact happens is that Work and Income do move them into a form of accommodation. It could be a motel, it could be some other form of accommodation—it depends on their circumstances. But then, ultimately, over time they get into a permanent residence, and that is happening more quickly. So, in fact, that is the very point: by going into Work and Income they do get the support.
The member is making it up.
Yes, we may as well adopt Labour's housing plan. We can also adopt Labour's internal polling, and, by the way, we will be living in fairyland, pixieland, or Disneyland—I do not know which, but you can choose.
Yes.
For the most part, yes.
The member would need to direct that question to the Minister for Social Housing.
What I am saying is that I do not wing things, because if I do the member will put in a breach of privilege claim, and if he wants an answer to a detailed question like that he should direct it to the appropriate Minister.
I think she will take confidence, then, in the announcement made by Minister today.
I cannot give the member an exact date, but with the work programme I have seen from the Minister I am confident that will be the case.
It has already started to work, and that is witnessed by the fact that we are in the biggest construction boom that we have seen.
Yes.
New Zealand is a better country for migration, and I can think of many examples. I can think of an Indian person who came to New Zealand 44 years ago, set up a business, employed 200 people, and, from time to time, made donations—forgettable or not—to political parties that they thought about. That is all as a result of migration, funnily enough, from India.
In answer to the first part of the question, very. And in answer to the second part of the question, no.
Most of that is because of mismatch of labour, so it is required in one part of the country and people are located in the other, or—as I said yesterday on Morning Report—people have a variety of reasons, from being unable to pass a drugs test, or a variety of other factors. So of course Work and Income does everything it can to get people in work, and one of the major changes this Government made was to re-face, if you like, the way Work and Income operates to get rid of the old dole and to replace it with job seeker support, and that has been highly effective.
There is nothing wrong with bringing in chefs, particularly if they are Indian. For some people, it can be very lucrative.
It is relieving to see the member today with his clothes on. And the answer to that question is, yes.
I know! I was in awe—shock and awe.
According to the latest Building Activity Survey from Statistics New Zealand, the amount of residential building work in the 3 months to July was the highest since the series began back in the 1980s. That is up 6 percent on the previous record level, set in March this year. It is an increase of 50 percent since 2013 and an increase of over 90 percent since the start of 2012. As I said previously, building consents have been running at the highest level for over 11 years, and we are looking for them to increase further.
There are a number of reasons why house numbers have not met the level that is required. Most of those reasons have been around the metropolitan urban limit restrictions, but also the global financial crisis had a big impact on developers not being in the position to be able to fulfil building plans. The good news is that we are narrowing that gap rapidly, and, under very low interest rates and a strong economy, more and more New Zealanders are buying a home.
There are a range of houses being built across New Zealand, at a range of different prices. One looks at the KiwiSaver HomeStart programme—around the regions, that is being used by a great many New Zealanders. We think it will benefit over 90,000. But even as of the recent data today, over 30 percent of all sales that took place in Auckland in the last 12 months were at $650,000 or less.
The honourable member answered that himself when he noted the big increase in the number of properties being built under the National-led Government. Yes, it is less than what is probably required, but we are getting very close to getting that number delivered each year. If one looks at the Government's comprehensive plan, it is everything from releasing public land to extra people being trained in the sector. We are in the biggest building boom we have seen, and this is the largest number of people ever employed in the construction sector. There are more houses to be built, but this Government is helping to assist those houses to be built.
That would not be borne out by the number of people who are using KiwiSaver HomeStart, which is for first-home buyers. Secondly, what is happening is that, of course, you do have house prices going up in both Auckland and generally around New Zealand, but that is fuelled by extremely low interest rates and also a very buoyant economy. We have one of the fastest-growing economies in the developed world, the second-highest employment rate in the world, and one of the lowest unemployment rates.
I do not accept the premise of the member's question.
Well, the number of houses being built both in Auckland and around New Zealand has been dramatically increasing in the time since I have been Prime Minister, from 10 a day to well over 40 a day. Just today the Government announced that there will be an additional $24 million going to support community housing providers. There was $50 million allocated in the Budget for emergency support. This is the Government that raised benefits for the first time in 43 years. This is the Government that also allocates over $2 billion a year to accommodation supplements and the like. I think the argument saying that we are not doing anything to help less-well-off New Zealanders simply does not hold water.
Yes, with one clarification: when I said yesterday that the numbers of people who come to New Zealand and claim refugee status or asylum are significantly fewer under this Government than when the Rt Hon Winston Peters was a Minister, I should have said that the proportion who claim was less.
The last sentence was: I should have said that the proportion who claim was less.
As I said in my answer to the primary question, I stand by the view that that is correct when it is taken with the word "proportion".
You will have to take up the written question with the Minister's office. I cannot answer that, and I have not actually even seen that parliamentary question, but in the information provided to my office—I can give the member an example, if he wants. If you go back and have a look, for instance, at the 2005-06 period, the number of people who temporarily came to New Zealand was 498,009, on the advice I had. The number of people who claimed for asylum was 317. The proportion was 0.063653468. In the 2015-16 equivalent, the number was 925,365, the number of people who made claims was 339, and the proportion was 0.036634193.
Because the Minister of Immigration advised me that the proportion is less—and the proportion is less.
I cannot make any comment on the written question, because I have not seen it, but that was the advice that the Minister gave me and it is correct.
No. If anyone was misleading the House yesterday it was the Rt Hon Winston Peters when he was taking the opportunity to make a quote about the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) programme, where he used the words I had used about the UNHCR programme deliberately misleadingly, actually, in his supplementary questions.
The member needs to go and look at his own Hansard and my quote that he used in his supplementary questions to me. As I said, I should have used the word "proportion". Other than that, the answer was quite correct, and I stand by it.
Neither of the Ministers. The member, if he wants a very detailed answer on something completely different from his supplementary questions, should ask the Minister of Immigration, but the Minister of Immigration advised me—because the member was asking a question—about proportions, and I gave the member the answer.
I stand by my full statement, which went on to say "But just think of the things we have done over the last 2 years alone". To say we have done nothing is absolutely not true. We have done a lot. So let me remind the House about the Government's comprehensive housing plan. It includes a new $1 billion dollar Housing Infrastructure Fund, over 210 special housing areas for 70,000 new homes, an expanded HomeStart scheme to first-home buyers, the National Policy Statement on Urban Development, Resource Management Act reform, a raft of extra tax measures, the new Auckland Unitary Plan, more tools for the Reserve Bank, the independent urban development authority's finding some areas of high housing need, and getting the Auckland Unitary Plan under way. By any measure, this is a comprehensive plan.
Of course there will be a range of incomes and a range of properties. One thing I do know is that wage growth under this Government has been in the better part of 25 percent in the 8 years that we have been in Government. Interest rates have plummeted to where they were under the previous Labour Government. If we look at the number of properties sold for under $650,000 in Auckland for the previous year, it was 37 percent of properties—at 11,842. And—out of interest—if one was to take a cursory look at TradeMe, as I did just before, around Auckland houses, apartments, townhouses, and units listed for sale at $600,000 and below, it lists 1,433 listings.
Everyone appreciates that special housing areas (SHAs) are a fast-track process and a fast-track zoning process, so of course it takes some time for those properties ultimately to have the horizontal infrastructure, and the like. But, for the record, the advice that my office has received is that as of 30 June 2016, when it comes to Auckland's SHAs, 1,300 homes have been completed, 2,200 building consents have been issued, 2,458 new sections have been created, and 7,170 new sections have been granted resource consent. Of the 154 SHAs in Auckland, 26 have been built on, with the capacity of 29,800; 15 have earthworks under way, with the capacity of 5,300; and 88 are in some stage of the planning process. Only 25 SHAs have no consents—
—of which 16 were declared SHAs in February to May of this year.
As you can see from the data I just read out to the House—and I will not repeat it, in the interests of time—there is no evidence, I think, to support that there is land banking.
If one looks at the household labour force survey out today, at 5.1 percent, at the jobs that have been created in the 8 years under this Government, at the level of interest rates in New Zealand now, and at the wage growth that has taken place—again under this Government, at 25 percent, and in real terms about 13 percent—I do not think it is true to say that people have given up. But certainly the Government has a number of responses, and one of those to help those first-home buyers is the KiwiSaver HomeStart programme, and I think that has been very successful.
Obviously I do not know the couple whom the member talks of, and I do not know their income and their circumstances. What I do know is that with interest rates at the levels that they are, with the job growth we are seeing, and, actually, with the prospects for New Zealand, I think there are a lot of young couples who would argue pretty strongly that they are out there, buying houses. There is one particular story, I think in the New Zealand Herald, about that, just today.
The only thing comprehensive was the way he abused Nick Leggett last week and the way Grant Robertson abused Liz MacPherson.
Yes. I have the privilege of leading a Government that is ambitious for New Zealand's future, and our policies reflect that ambition.
The failure really was the metropolitan urban limit in Auckland that choked off land supply, which I am sure was one of the real lefty ideas that the Greens were promoting.
In answer to the first part of the question, yes, and if the member wants me to, I am more than happy to read out the statistics.
OK, so the member does want me to. All right. As of 30 June 2016 in Auckland, the advice my office has is that 1,300 homes have been completed, 2,200 building consents have been issued, 2,458 sections have been created, and 7,170 sections have been granted resource consent. Of the 154 special housing areas in Auckland, 26 have been built on, 15 have earthworks, and 88 are in some stage of planning process. Only 25 have no consent or plan change lodged, but 16 of those were declared between February and May of this year. I think most people would acknowledge that a special housing area is a way of fast-tracking the development of these properties, but they still need to have Resource Management Act consent, they still have to have horizontal infrastructure, they still need to—

Well, we did not have them 8 years ago, Phil. What we had was the metropolitan urban limit, which we inherited from your lefty mates.
The member is quite incorrect, and in fact the data I have given to the House is correct. But what I do not support is the hard-working young couple who go out and buy a house, who borrow money against the equity that they have put down, only to see that house price halve. That member has launched a war on the poor. She is saying to the poorest New Zealanders who are borrowing money against their property that she wants to see them owing the bank more than their house is worth. I think there is a reason why the Greens' numbers are tumbling, and that is because people can see that.
Given that only a very small proportion either do not have planning under way, earthworks under way, or building on them, I would say that special housing areas have been highly effective, actually, as a way of releasing land. There will be one or two that do not go ahead—it was never guaranteed that they would, but what was guaranteed was that they would allow process to happen more rapidly, and that is exactly what is happening. What the member is trying to tell New Zealanders is that at the moment that the Minister of Housing designates an area a special housing area—
Well, firstly, I think we can see that special housing areas are a success, because houses are being built and development is taking place. But I will give the member a clue of what a terse letter would look like: "Dear Mr and Mrs Bloggs of Auckland. I know you borrowed $450,000 from the ANZ against your $100,000 worth of equity—or $150,000—in your $600,000 property. But now Metiria Turei has managed to turn that into a $300,000 property, and therefore could you sell your property with no equity left." That is what a 50 percent reduction in house prices would look like. It is a war—
—on the poor.
Yes.
Yes.
I think if one looks overall at the management of oceans that are under New Zealand's control, you would say that they are sustainably managed. I think the quota management system by and large actually has been a highly effective method. Secondly, in terms of marine mammals and the like, the Government has been moving, as the member knows, towards putting more of New Zealand's marine space into ocean sanctuaries. Last week, in fact, the Government was delighted by the steps that New Zealand had led, with the United States, in relation to the Ross Sea. Obviously, we are looking to make progress on the Kermadecs. New Zealand has also done, in the time that we have been the Government, a number of other ocean sanctuaries in relation to places like Kaikōura. So it is a general yes—I think the Government is progressing that objective—but we acknowledge there are some potentially endangered species, and that is why we are taking the steps that we are.
For the most part, yes, I think they are working, but one of the threats to our birdlife, for instance, is from predators, and that is why the Government has been supportive of, and has the initiative of, a predator-free New Zealand by 2050.
I would need to get absolute advice on that, but, testing my memory, it was partly to do with the fact that we believe that the way that we measure our oceans in relation to the quota management system, with a measure of marine reserves, is a more effective way of doing things. I think the member will probably find that a lot of the countries that voted for that simply do not have the ocean space that New Zealand does. I think New Zealand is pretty well respected internationally for the work it does around marine protection. We would certainly like to make progress on the Kermadecs; we realise that the Green Party is supportive of that, and if it would like to go and talk to the nice people at Te Ohu Kaimoana (TOKM) and get them to see it the Green Party's way, collectively we will be able to pass that though Parliament very rapidly.


Yes, I agree with the policy, but we then decided to advance the Kermadecs. As I said, if he could just make himself busy this afternoon and go down to see the good people at TOKM and convince them that, actually, conservation for the wider good of all New Zealanders is a worthy and admirable cause, then we will be able to pass that legislation very soon.
No.
Absolutely, because crime rates have fallen significantly over the term of this National-led Government.

I cannot give you the exact answer. I do not know all of the reasons, but in some cases it will be because of more widespread use of drugs and some people feeding their drugs habit. That would be one reason. There will be many reasons, though.
No. There are a variety of different reasons. One of them is that, for instance, when it comes to domestic violence, that has become a topic that is now more widely debated and exposed, and there is more reporting going on of domestic violence. So, no, I do not think that is the case. This is a Government that has put $300 million more into police budgets just in 2016 alone. The annual budget has gone from $1.2 billion to $1.6 billion. There are hundreds more extra police under a National-led Government and greater use of technology.
We have substantially increased the number of police. One of the things that we have been looking at in the time that we have been in Government is to say that, of course, one way of measuring the number of police is to look at it on a ratio basis, but, actually, I think there are also other ways of looking at it more effectively. For instance, when we look at the use of technology—which I think is a far better investment in a lot of ways—we have effectively gained 354 extra police. You can put all of those things in the budget, but it is really a sort of a slightly lazy way of thinking things to just dream up a number on the day of a police conference and claim that it is a policy. It is not really a policy, is it?
Firstly, we have been investing considerably more. Secondly, there are different ways of measuring these things. Yes, there were policies that were taken to the 2008 election—which is quite a number of elections ago—but over time the Government not only is investing more but, of course, is looking at ways that we will continue to invest. But just dreaming up a number, as the member did—the reason that he got coverage on page A7 or A9 of the New Zealand Herald about this figure was because no one actually believes he is going to be in a position to do it anyway.
I am sure the police will always argue that they needs more resources, but that is equally true of every publicly funded institution—they will always argue that they need more. Under this National-led Government there have been not only 600 more police but 354 additional extra police in the sense that the technology that we have rolled out has allowed them to do that. The Government is funding more for police resources and, over time, will give them more, but I do not actually accept the argument that the police are under-resourced. I accept the argument that over time they can do with more, but they have had significant increases in the time we have been the Government.
If one looks at total crime in New Zealand since 2011, it is down 15 percent. I accept that in the last year it is up 1.4 percent. There has also been an international trend: in OECD countries crime has gone down a bit and crime has risen a bit, but overall it is down 15 percent, which is actually pretty similar to Labour's polling since 2008, now that it is down to about 15 percent.
Yes, in the context they were made.
Definitely.
No, I am not concerned, but I did not need to read the report to know that. But what I do know is that the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases, which New Zealand has been an inaugural member of, is well on its way, I believe, to finding solutions over time—scientific solutions—to the issue of agricultural emissions.
I think it is plainly obvious for the world to see that with a growing global population, more food is going to be required. It is also known that New Zealand agriculture has a low carbon footprint relative to other countries in the world, so if the option is destocking and then not increasing that supply in other parts of the world—
Before I was interrupted, the point I was simply making is that the world does not have an option of credibly destocking in a major way. It certainly would not be in New Zealand's interests to do that, because that production would be moved to a less carbon-friendly environment offshore. On the basis that that is the case, the world actually does need to find scientific solutions, and I would have thought that as the co-leader of the Green Party and as someone who sometimes talks about science and innovation, he would support that.
No, I do not accept that advice. I think, over time, there will be scientific solutions that will allow us to combat that, and I think it will be eminently possible that New Zealand will be able to increase its production and lower its carbon footprint from agriculture.
I think the member is taking a pretty narrow perspective on it. We are part of the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases, in which there are over 40 countries investing. With such an enormous amount of scientific research, brainpower, and effort going in, what is the probability that there will not be solutions found? We actually already know that there were some solutions found in this area. There were other issues around dicyandiamide and the like that were side effects of that, and we need to go and deal with those issues, but the point is that progress is being made. You would have to be the most unambitious, most unoptimistic person in the world to not believe that we are going to find some solutions to these issues through science.
Firstly, we would have to check the veracity of that statement. Secondly, farmers already have a price on some of their inputs for agriculture, and, further, we have one of the very few sets of farmers in the world who operate on a completely unsubsidised basis. Putting an additional tax on them that no other farmers face is, I think, grossly unfair. I know the member comes from a party that hates farmers, but over here we actually like them.
Does she agree with me that she has been an outstanding Minister and she will be sadly missed?
I am advised that it has not been standard practice to release such information. However, the member, like any other member of the public, is welcome to request advice under the Official Information Act. Any request will be handled in the usual way and treated with careful consideration. I am not going to pre-empt that process today. In addition, I would note that the member's question refers to ships visiting in November from the United States, the United Kingdom, China, and France. If the member is referring to the Royal New Zealand Navy's 75th commemorations, I would point out that neither the United Kingdom nor France is actually sending a ship. They are contributing in other ways, which we very much welcome.
No, I think it does give irrefutable evidence, and that is because the advice that was prepared and given to me to enable me as Prime Minister to sign the approval declaration came not only from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Minister of Foreign Affairs but also from the Attorney-General and the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. They use a wide range of information sources. I notice that in this morning's newspaper, one of the activists who had swum out in, I think, 1983 was saying that even he would not bother donning his swimming togs because he accepted that the ship was neither nuclear-armed nor nuclear-powered.
Firstly, I have not seen a single person who has raised a contrary view that the USS Sampson is anything other than non - nuclear powered and non - nuclear armed. If the member can point to somebody, that would be interesting. Of course, there will always be people around the world who are conspiracy theorists, and if that is the line he is pushing today, he might have to put himself in that category.
The Act spells out very clearly the obligations on me as Prime Minister. I received advice in relation to the Act from the Attorney-General. I am not in the habit of signing declarations that would put me in breach of the law and that would result in my failing to fulfil the obligations required of me as Prime Minister under the Act. I am totally confident that I have met the requirements of the Act.

Yes. I should remind the member that at the invitation of President Obama, I have been to a number of the nuclear security summits that he has held, and that is reflecting the credentials of New Zealand. One of the very, very first statements I made a decade ago when I became the leader of the National Party—in Opposition, in 2006—was that we would be observing New Zealand's nuclear-free status.
Yes, I do stand by that statement, and I am proud of the progress New Zealand is making. For example, the economy grew by 3.6 percent in the year to June, putting us in the four top-performing OECD countries. The average annual wage is now $58,000, an increase of 25 percent since National first came into office. More than 300,000 jobs have been created since the depths of the global financial crisis and a further 170,000 people are forecast to be in work by 2020. Cost of living increases are low: annual inflation is just 0.2 percent, well below average weekly wage increases of 2 percent in the year to June. So, backed by the Government's successful economic plan and New Zealanders' hard work, our country is making good progress.
There can be a range of different reasons. They include that there may be a mismatch of where the skills are required vis-à-vis where the people live. It is not always easy to move people to locations and encourage them to go and work there, even if there are jobs that are available.
Again, there can be a variety of reasons, but I think it is worth remembering the significant changes that this Government has made to the way things work when someone goes to a Work and Income office—that is, we have changed by moving from the unemployment benefit to the jobseeker support. There is a high expectation that people will work. What, in fact, Work and Income officers do is spend a lot of time making sure that somebody transitions into a job. Ultimately, there are massive incentives for them to get employment, but sometimes the jobs are in different locations—for instance, like Queenstown—to places where they might live, like Gisborne and Northland.
I can. There are a number of other indicators confirming that New Zealand is making good progress. For example, the manufacturing and services sector, including tourism and ICT, is growing strongly and is succeeding on the world stage. The Government has fulfilled its promise of returning to Budget surplus, which gives us choices into the future. More Kiwis are voting with their feet and coming home, as opposed to leaving for Australia by the tens of thousands as they were when we took office, and the Government is addressing some of New Zealand's most difficult challenges, such as improving educational achievement, supporting vulnerable families, and boosting skills and employment.
In my opinion, yes, actually, the Salvation Army is wrong. If one looks at the number of people who are here on youth migration, the vast bulk of them are actually on working holidays or are international students. Yes, they work, sometimes, 20 hours a week or the like, which is, I think, a welcome change, and it allows New Zealand to be an attractive destination, for instance, for international students. But when one goes and has a look, for instance, in Christchurch—which is where I saw the Salvation Army saying there could have been more done to put people in apprenticeships, as a result of the Christchurch earthquakes—I think the Salvation Army should go and visit Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology. I certainly did, and it has been training an enormous number of young people into apprenticeships.
The biggest challenge facing New Zealand when the Government took office was neatly summed up in the Salvation Army's state of the nation report in 2008. It said: "More of our children appear to be at risk of harm, more of our young people are engaged in petty crime, there is … violent crime and more people [are] in our jails. None of these trends can be seen as progress." The Salvation Army went on to say that despite a huge increase in social spending up to 2008, it had contributed little to our social progress. Outcomes were mixed and disappointing. The Government has addressed that by measuring success by the results achieved, not by how much we spend.
As the member will see, last week the Government went through its 2-yearly review process and made, at the margins, some small changes. But, for the most part, I think that migration set at the sorts of levels that we have had has served New Zealand well. It has encouraged international students to come to New Zealand. We have free-trade agreements that support working holidays. We have fast-growing sectors in industries that are doing amazingly well, and they do actually need, from time to time, to import talent. You have had plenty of people come to New Zealand who are significant investors in this country and who, as a result of their migration to New Zealand and their investment in New Zealand, have created tremendous jobs. That is one of the reasons why we have got one of the top performing economies in the OECD, and if—
Absolutely, a better future for young New Zealanders. But I was not the one who got up at Diwali on Saturday and said "I'm with the international students."; that was Andrew Little, who was there trying to make out he is the friend of the migrant—when he is not bagging them for having a Chinese name and he is not out there telling them that Indian chefs are not welcome in this country.
No. In fact, the "neets" rate for 15- to 19-year-olds is almost the lowest since records began in 2004. A huge number of young New Zealanders are in apprenticeships. The economy is creating a huge number of jobs and opportunities. I think migration of people to New Zealand is a positive and good thing, but if the member wants to come into this House and say the opposite, please stop going to the events I am at with you and saying the opposite, because it has got a word. It starts with "h", and you know what it is.
I seek leave to move a motion without notice that this House express its sadness at the passing of His Majesty the King of Thailand, Bhumibol Adulyadej.
I move, That this House express its sadness at the passing of His Majesty Bhumibol Adulyadej, the King of Thailand, at the age of 89, who this year celebrated 70 years on the throne. King Bhumibol was the world's longest-serving monarch, and he made an extraordinary contribution to Thailand and the region during his reign. He presided over a period of transformative growth and development that saw Thailand emerge as a regional leader and one of South-east Asia's major economies, and he will be remembered for his lifelong devotion to the welfare and well-being of the people of Thailand.

The visit of His Majesty and Queen Sirikit to New Zealand in 1962 was a cornerstone of the close and friendly ties that have since developed between Thailand and New Zealand. This year New Zealand and Thailand are celebrating the 60th anniversary of diplomatic relations.

His Majesty's loss is deeply felt by the Thai people. On behalf of all New Zealanders, I would like to express our sincere condolences to Queen Sirikit, Thailand's royal family, and, of course, the people of Thailand.
Yes; and as Prime Minister.
First, I am not sure that that is actually the statement that I made, but, second, I think it is worth reflecting on what is happening. That is that the Government has had a fairly comprehensive plan that has seen, actually, significantly more resources for both Police and Customs, and more money put into rehabilitation beds. That has seen—on the estimates of the most significant survey in this area, actually—the usage of P reduced by about half. What is true, though, is the enormous price differential between what the product actually sells for in New Zealand and what you can buy it for in markets like Mexico or China, meaning there is a huge incentive for people to bring it into New Zealand.
No, I do not agree at all, and the facts do not back that up.
I think it would be a stretch of the legislation to use the proceeds of crime to exterminate rats, and, therefore, we are using the legislation and the powers within the legislation to use those resources. Far from being behind the ball, actually, the Government has been quite forward-leaning in this area, but one has to accept that around the world the use of P has actually increased for the hardened end. The overall usage rates in New Zealand have declined, on the survey work.
The member is entitled to hold that view if he wants to, but the biggest survey in this area—which is an anonymous survey that people fill in and also takes into account the number of people who present themselves at hospitals and the like—indicates that the broader usage of P is going down. What is absolutely true, I think, is that the hardened end of users is going up, and what has been the case is that we have become much better at identifying that now. People do test homes, for instance, for the use of P and the like. The reality is that New Zealand—I think, actually, above Australia—has one of the highest rates, if not the highest rate, in the OECD, and that there are enormous price differentials, which encourage the gangs to try to bring it into New Zealand. We need to combat that, and that is what we are doing.
Yes; and with a sartorial elegance that I know the member privately admires.
A considerable amount. That is what the comprehensive housing plan is about. It is ultimately about dealing with the issues that were created through the metropolitan urban limit in Auckland. It is the release of special housing lands. It is the reform of the Resource Management Act (RMA). It is first-home buyers' grants for New Zealanders. It is a much stronger economy to create jobs. It is the release of land. There is just a range of things that the Government has done to address that issue.
No, and if the member is feeling guilty about the fact that he was part of a Government that did nothing when it came to housing, he should just get up and say sorry.
A great deal has happened when it comes to improving the supply of housing in Auckland and across New Zealand. That is why, in the year to August, nationwide residential building consents have increased by 14 percent to 29,622—the highest total since March 2005. I remind the member that he was part of a Government that saw nationwide house prices double—
Oh, the member does not like it when we point out what actually happened—
Speaking to the point of order—
I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I may stand corrected, and the member might want to make this clear, but I am pretty sure that he is quoting from statements I made back in 2008 when I was not Prime Minister, in which case, by definition, that does bring the points that I am making about the previous Government well and truly into play, because that is what the question is about.
Yes, and, as I said in answer to an almost identical question from Mr Little last month, according to the latest building activity survey from Statistics New Zealand, the amount of residential building work in the 3 months to July was the highest since the series began back in the 1980s. That is up 6 percent on the previous record levels, set in March this year. That is an increase of 50 percent since 2013 and over 90 percent since the start of 2012. As I said previously, building consents have been running at the highest level for over 11 years, and we are looking to increase them further.
No, I cannot confirm that. But what I can confirm is that if we look at the special housing areas established by the Government since October 2013, over 1,300 homes have been completed, 2,200 building consents have been issued, 2,458 new sections have been created, and 7,170 new sections have been granted resource consent—
The Government is making good progress.
No. I cannot confirm that. But it is hardly surprising that the demand for housing has gone up, because when I became Prime Minister of this country 35,000 New Zealanders a year deserted for Australia—because they were sick of Helen Clark's Government—and now they are coming home to New Zealand.
The Government has, through its comprehensive plan, been demonstrating to New Zealanders that it is very serious about increasing supply and, in fact, that the increase in supply that we are seeing is having a dramatic effect. One only needs to go round Auckland for about 5 minutes and have a look at the enormous amount of construction that is under way. That is why we know there are literally thousands and thousands more people working in construction—tens of thousands, actually—in Auckland than there were a few years ago.
The member is talking nonsense when he wants to try and trot out his little number of 18, and it dents what very little credibility he has got. As the Minister for Building and Housing has pointed out, over 500 houses meet the criteria that he defines, and that is why the member has no credibility, because he just keeps making things up—
I did not. What I did claim was that the $1 billion could be used by councils in the five areas. That will make a difference. That was as a result of ongoing discussions we have had with a number of councils over a long period of time where they talked to us about their inability to take more debt on their balance sheet. The Opposition members cannot have it both ways. On the one hand they want to tell us that we are taking it too slowly to get them what they want—and when we move rapidly they tell us we are going too fast. Maybe we have just got a Goldilocks situation: about right.
 It does not matter how many times the member comes to the House with a made-up number that he cannot back up. It does not make it right. It is just like when he keeps telling everyone that he has the support of his caucus. That does not mean it is right either.
 Yes.
 Yes.
 Yes, but that is exactly the point, is it not? Last week the member was saying that the target should have 17—today she seems to be saying it is 51. For the last while she has been saying that the number of children is 360,000 and then she said yesterday that she wanted to accept that the Government's number of 85,000—or at least, 60,000 to 100,000—was correct. She is all over the map, and that is the point. The Government is far better to approach—
 What the Government did—and, I think, quite correctly—was to say that poverty is a very complicated issue, but that there are some individual component parts that, if the Government focuses resources on and gives attention to, can make significant gains. We are doing that in terms of rheumatic fever. We are doing that in terms of the number of children being immunised. We are doing that in terms of the number of children having access to early childhood education. We are doing that in terms of the number of teenage pregnancies, with young mums on the equivalent of the domestic purposes benefit. I think it is far more sensible for the Government to approach this issue in a systematic and thorough way, dealing with each of these issues, rather than the member spending, as she wants to, her lifetime dreaming up some dodgy number that she knows is wrong.
 I doubt we would have an individual Better Public Services target for each one, or there would be so many individual targets that it might lose some of its meaning. All of those issues are on the Government's radar, and all of them are getting attention.
 Quite the opposite. This is the first Government in the history of this Parliament that has had a list of Better Public Services targets and has been quite happy to be measured against them, and has set those targets in quite challenging areas. The Government produces a raft of different measures and reports in relation to poverty and income, including the longitudinal study by Bryan Perry, which shows that income inequality is not getting worse. The reason the member does not quote it is that she does not like it, because it does not suit her arguments.
 Absolutely nothing, and that is why the Government has these individual targets and has a range of different measures. But it is not this Government; there has been longstanding advice from officials that one single measure of poverty in this country would be an inappropriate way of dealing with it.
 The Government has a large number of targets for the various things we want to achieve, from the roll-out of ultra-fast broadband to reductions in welfare dependence and contributors to poverty. Generally, we are on track, but, as I said when we set the Better Public Services targets, they are deliberately challenging and we may not meet all of them. For many we will not know the results for a number of years, so it is not feasible to give a comprehensive list of which will be missed. It is important not to make judgments too early, though, as the member found when he described the 2014-15 Budget surplus target as "the biggest political deception … of our lifetime". How wrong he was.

In answer to the first part of the question, yes. In answer to the second part of the question, you need to direct that to the Minister for Building and Housing.
I do not have that particular data, but what I am proud of is the Government's first-home buyers grant scheme through KiwiSaver HomeStart, which has assisted a great many young New Zealanders into buying a first home.
I do not have that data with me.
The member's numbers are quite incorrect. If he goes out to Hobsonville or Weymouth, or a number of other projects, he will see that it is considerably more than that. In fact, I recall reading the front page of the New Zealand Herald on Monday, where the Minister of Finance was quoted about the extensive number of affordable properties that will be sold as a result of the redevelopment of Housing New Zealand projects.
If the member wants to believe some dodgy number, he is welcome to, but then, he believes a whole lot of dodgy numbers sometimes. If one goes and has a look at the number of houses being sold, the consenting that has been going through, the additional people working in housing and construction in Auckland, and the number of people drawing down on first-home buyers and the like—the member will know that when I first became Prime Minister, 10 houses a day were being sold in Auckland; now it is probably on its way to 45 or 50 houses, and it will be considerably more next year.
In answer to the last part of the question, no, that is not true. In answer to the first part of the question, it is not 18, but even if it were 18 it would still be five times the number of people who voted for Andrew Little to be the leader.
I don't know where he is at the moment.
Yes.
I do stand by that statement, which really just reflects what the Electricity Authority's mandate is to do.
I think it would be better if I did not comment, because ultimately the decision is the preliminary decision, as I understand it, from the Electricity Authority. It is independent in making that decision. It is highly likely that once it goes through its review process there will then be further input, and, potentially, litigation, that involves this area. So it is not something the Government directly influences; the Electricity Authority is independent in making those decisions.
As I said earlier, it is important, I think, to understand that, firstly, the Electricity Authority is independent in terms of making these decisions. It obviously tries to have a degree of equity in terms of its decision making. Secondly, these things are going through a process, as I understand it, where there is a review. Thirdly, they may well be subject to litigation. Clearly, the country needs an electricity system that works well and is appropriately funded, and the Electricity Authority has that responsibility.
I accept that the member is part of a caucus where they do everything that Winston tells them to do, but we live in a political party—
Does the Minister of Finance think that he might have choices on how to spend the Government's resources, when the economy grows at 3.6 percent and has one of the fastest wage growths in the last 8 years, when the Government's books are back in surplus, with the unemployment rates—
Yes, especially this comment: "This is a government that's been very focused on the most at-risk kids. We want to do better for them."
Because the official advice is that there are a great many ways of measuring children who may or may not be in poverty, and one of the problems with having an individual target is you would then spend your time, I think, (a) potentially stigmatising a lot of kids, (b) not giving the money to areas that you actually need to—like rheumatic fever—and, thirdly, disagreeing with it. The member's definition of homeless people is 41,000 people including people living on couches. The member's definition of poor children is 360,000. The Government's is 60,000. There you go—we do not agree.
 I am sure, if the member is doing justice to the report and reading it out correctly, that will be correct. That will be the report commissioned by Bryan Perry, which is the most definitive guide to measuring hardship in New Zealand, and I quote it where the report says "There is no evidence of increased poverty. Rates of material hardship in children have fallen in recent years."
 Yes, and that is why the Government has been saying for some time—when the member has been going out there inflating the number of children in extreme poverty—that the Government's best calculation is between 60,000 and 100,000. At that point we were saying that we did not have Bryan Perry's most recent report, but the indications were that it would be around the mid-point and, indeed, it proved to be that.


 There is absolutely nothing wrong with them, and that is what the Government does: it uses exactly that data and then it sets individual targets for things like immunisation and for areas like participation in early childhood education. It looks at income issues for families most at risk—that is the whole point. The Government goes out there—and this Government has done more than any other Government to do exactly that in terms of insulating homes, in terms of maintaining Working for Families and extending it, and in terms of making sure there are free doctors visits and putting significant resources into rheumatic fever. That is the point: the Government uses the data and then assesses individual targets.
 The Government has chosen to set individual targets on an individualised component, part of what might be defined as poverty. We think that is a better and more effective way of making sure we are delivering for these kids. These kids are the top priority of the Government. That is why we have been putting so much money into areas like rheumatic fever, and insulating 300,000 homes and making sure that is the top priority for those homes now—in fact, actually, those that are occupied by the least well-off New Zealanders. The member is saying that there is one definition of poverty. There is not. The moment that you do that, the member will then come back and say that she is, effectively, stigmatising a whole bunch of kids.
 I will not set a particular reduction target, but what I will do is continue to do what the Government has been doing, which is focusing absolutely on those children and that is one of the reasons why the Government has been saying that the number of those children who are in that group is between 60,000 and 100,000. It is why we are the first Government in 43 years to raise benefits. But I will raise one issue for the House—

Mr Speaker.
No. I want to carry on with my answer.
We tend to make good progress towards those targets, because they are focused on addressing some of New Zealand's biggest challenges. For example, we have set practical targets in the areas that contribute to material hardship and poverty. These include increasing infant immunisation rates, reducing rheumatic fever, increasing early childhood education participation, and reducing the number of assaults on children.
The Government is certainly not opposed to the individual components of what Judge Becroft was talking about. Actually, the Government has been doing a great deal in terms of working on those, including increasing benefits, increasing Working for Families payments, and increasing childcare assistance, just as an example. But it is important to understand that my advice is that Judge Becroft's target actually comes off a survey, or a poll, which is then factored up, so I do not think that would actually be a terribly good measure.
No, he does not, actually.
Some children and some families have been in poverty for a very, very long time in New Zealand's history. I will say that the United Nations report does not cover the point at which this Government was the first Government in 43 years to raise benefits for families with children. This Government is extremely focused on the needs of those youngsters, and that is why it has individual targets on an individualised basis for a great many of them. We do not believe in, and the official advice does not support, one single target for poverty.
I am not sure I wholly accept the member's proposition, but some of those factors have been a result of the recession. The good news is that we now have one of the fastest growth rates in the OECD. As the Minister of Finance pointed out in the last question, we have had one of the fastest income growth rates in the last 8 years. That is the very reason why the Government did things like not only support Working for Families in the most difficult times but actually extend it. It is why we have free GP visits. It is why this was the first Government in 43 years to raise benefits.
I simply do not know her circumstances.
Actually, this Government has been more focused than probably any other Government on making sure that youngsters are in a warm house. That is why it has insulated 300,000 homes, which is multiples more than the previous Government did. That is why this Government increased benefits for the first time in 43 years. That is why this Government has been part of a programme with Fonterra and Sanitarium, for instance, for 7 million breakfasts. The official advice does not support one single definition of poverty, and, actually, interestingly enough, one of the reasons that you might not want to do that is that the Opposition itself says that as soon as you put a label on a child—let us say it is now going to be—

—the Ministry for Vulnerable Children— The member does not like it, but he wants—
I know the member is running out of staff at a great rate of knots, but he really needs to get some new and better lines and stop proving to the country that he is "Angry Andrew"—
Yes; and eloquently.
 I would have to look at the particular statement that the member is meaning.


 Because I believed it to be correct—I think it is correct—but I should have added the word "proportionally", as I said and corrected the next day.
 Yes, and the reason for that is that we knew the member was challenging it, and so we were making sure the facts were correct. But I was advised in the House, before I answered the question, by the Minister of Immigration.
 No. The member needs to go and pull the tape. Go and have a look at the visuals, and the member will see the Minister of Immigration being over here advising me before I answer the question.
 Go and look at the video.
 Yes.
 Because, firstly, I think it is a well-accepted convention that the Prime Minister does speak for the Government across a range of portfolios. That is why journalists ask me questions across a range of portfolios, and, actually, it is why the Opposition asks me questions every day across a range of portfolios. Secondly, I made that statement when I was overseas—I think in either Pohnpei or Laos—and the point I was making was that I was not entirely sure what statements Louise had made on her behalf, but she would have seen my comments, and if she had seen my comments, she would accept that I would be speaking for the Government.
 Yes, I do, and I did not see the member making a comment yesterday when I gave what I thought was a pretty hard-hitting speech, actually, on domestic violence. The member criticised me for making that speech.
 No, I think the Minister is being quite correct. The Government is still a party to the particular inquiry. Actually, I looked at the Minister's statements. The Minister's statements were quite hard-hitting in a generic sense, but she did not have the exact information about this particular case.
 Yes. I think members opposite will know that I am always a very measured person.
 I do not have all of the details, so I cannot tell you exactly the individual players' names. But in terms of discussions with the New Zealand Rugby Union, I think the rugby union itself—let alone me—has been making the very point that it thinks that this behaviour and the events of the Monday sort of "leer-up" are not a good idea.
 Well, there is a range of portfolios that from time to time are outside Cabinet. It just depends on who we think has the best skills, actually, to conduct those. But let us be honest. That member has been outside Government for the entire time she has been in this Parliament, and maybe that does explain why she has done nothing since she has been here.
 No, the Minister is free to discuss the matter, but she makes the correct point that she does not have the details.
 Well, I am not aware of any Minister who has told the Minister for Women not to comment on this matter.
 I disagree with the member that there is a housing crisis, but, of course, housing is a key area of focus for this Government and I have had a number of meetings with Ministers on housing and how it affects New Zealanders and their families. That is why the Government has a comprehensive housing plan to address the issue of rising house prices.
 I would need to check the validity of the member's number. What I can say, though, is that the Government is moving more people into social housing more rapidly than we have seen for a long period of time and is providing nearly $2 billion in housing support and accommodation supplements. I am pleased to say, on a somewhat related issue, we have insulated nearly 300,000 homes across New Zealand.


 The member is quite incorrect on both parts of his question.
 What the Government has been doing for the most vulnerable New Zealanders in that area is making sure that they get the support that they need, and that includes the additional $50-odd million that we put into the Budget. We are seeing more people moving on to social housing—about 150 extra a week. But, of course, if the person that the member mentions does not have a house to live in, then I suggest that, in the first instance, they go to Work and Income, and Work and Income will be providing them with support.
 That is the very point, is it not? When people go to see Work and Income, if they register that, for instance, they are in the most vulnerable of living conditions—a house or a tent—what in fact happens is that Work and Income do move them into a form of accommodation. It could be a motel, it could be some other form of accommodation—it depends on their circumstances. But then, ultimately, over time they get into a permanent residence, and that is happening more quickly. So, in fact, that is the very point: by going into Work and Income they do get the support.
 The member is making it up.
 Yes, we may as well adopt Labour's housing plan. We can also adopt Labour's internal polling, and, by the way, we will be living in fairyland, pixieland, or Disneyland—I do not know which, but you can choose.
 Yes.
Yes, on many fronts, including the work that she has done today on family violence, which I think both Parliament and the country will recognise as being some of the most important work that a Minister of Justice has done in a very long period of time.
No. Part 2 of the anti - money-laundering legislation has been introduced to the House, but what we do know from the work that the Government has done is that it will have quite far-reaching costs and implications for a number of sectors in New Zealand. Of course, they need to meet those requirements over time, and we will be ensuring that that happens, but there will be a cost implication for New Zealanders and we are just trying to make sure we manage all of that.
I do not think that would be an accurate summary of events.
Not to the best of my knowledge, but if the member wants to put it down in writing, I will have my office check.
I do not accept the member's proposition.
There will be a bill in the House by the end of the year, but it will go through the normal parliamentary process, and so that will depend, I guess, on the number of submissions. But also, as I said earlier, just before the member trips over her high horse, she needs to realise that there are far-reaching implications for a huge number of New Zealanders. I know there are a lot of New Zealanders she does not represent, but, nevertheless, that is the case.
Yes.
For the most part, yes.
The member would need to direct that question to the Minister for Social Housing.
What I am saying is that I do not wing things, because if I do the member will put in a breach of privilege claim, and if he wants an answer to a detailed question like that he should direct it to the appropriate Minister.
I think she will take confidence, then, in the announcement made by Minister today.
I cannot give the member an exact date, but with the work programme I have seen from the Minister I am confident that will be the case.
It has already started to work, and that is witnessed by the fact that we are in the biggest construction boom that we have seen.
Yes.
New Zealand is a better country for migration, and I can think of many examples. I can think of an Indian person who came to New Zealand 44 years ago, set up a business, employed 200 people, and, from time to time, made donations—forgettable or not—to political parties that they thought about. That is all as a result of migration, funnily enough, from India.
In answer to the first part of the question, very. And in answer to the second part of the question, no.
Most of that is because of mismatch of labour, so it is required in one part of the country and people are located in the other, or—as I said yesterday on Morning Report—people have a variety of reasons, from being unable to pass a drugs test, or a variety of other factors. So of course Work and Income does everything it can to get people in work, and one of the major changes this Government made was to re-face, if you like, the way Work and Income operates to get rid of the old dole and to replace it with job seeker support, and that has been highly effective.
There is nothing wrong with bringing in chefs, particularly if they are Indian. For some people, it can be very lucrative.
It is relieving to see the member today with his clothes on. And the answer to that question is, yes.
According to the latest Building Activity Survey from Statistics New Zealand, the amount of residential building work in the 3 months to July was the highest since the series began back in the 1980s. That is up 6 percent on the previous record level, set in March this year. It is an increase of 50 percent since 2013 and an increase of over 90 percent since the start of 2012. As I said previously, building consents have been running at the highest level for over 11 years, and we are looking for them to increase further.
There are a number of reasons why house numbers have not met the level that is required. Most of those reasons have been around the metropolitan urban limit restrictions, but also the global financial crisis had a big impact on developers not being in the position to be able to fulfil building plans. The good news is that we are narrowing that gap rapidly, and, under very low interest rates and a strong economy, more and more New Zealanders are buying a home.
There are a range of houses being built across New Zealand, at a range of different prices. One looks at the KiwiSaver HomeStart programme—around the regions, that is being used by a great many New Zealanders. We think it will benefit over 90,000. But even as of the recent data today, over 30 percent of all sales that took place in Auckland in the last 12 months were at $650,000 or less.
The honourable member answered that himself when he noted the big increase in the number of properties being built under the National-led Government. Yes, it is less than what is probably required, but we are getting very close to getting that number delivered each year. If one looks at the Government's comprehensive plan, it is everything from releasing public land to extra people being trained in the sector. We are in the biggest building boom we have seen, and this is the largest number of people ever employed in the construction sector. There are more houses to be built, but this Government is helping to assist those houses to be built.
That would not be borne out by the number of people who are using KiwiSaver HomeStart, which is for first-home buyers. Secondly, what is happening is that, of course, you do have house prices going up in both Auckland and generally around New Zealand, but that is fuelled by extremely low interest rates and also a very buoyant economy. We have one of the fastest-growing economies in the developed world, the second-highest employment rate in the world, and one of the lowest unemployment rates.
I do not accept the premise of the member's question.
Well, the number of houses being built both in Auckland and around New Zealand has been dramatically increasing in the time since I have been Prime Minister, from 10 a day to well over 40 a day. Just today the Government announced that there will be an additional $24 million going to support community housing providers. There was $50 million allocated in the Budget for emergency support. This is the Government that raised benefits for the first time in 43 years. This is the Government that also allocates over $2 billion a year to accommodation supplements and the like. I think the argument saying that we are not doing anything to help less-well-off New Zealanders simply does not hold water.
Does the Minister find it very odd when she constantly gets to read reports from people who claim that they want children in New Zealand to get a better education, especially the least well-off New Zealanders, but never want to do anything other than just back up their union mates?
Is the Minister aware that on Stewart Island the school there has 28 pupils and those 28 pupils are all learning Mandarin, the entire school, and they are learning online, and is that not a great thing—that young kids on Stewart Island are learning Chinese?
I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker.
Yes. I seek leave to table the press release, then.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
The member constantly demonstrates that she does not really understand what is happening. If she did, she would see that wages have gone up 25 percent in New Zealand and, as I noted earlier to the House, interest rates have halved under this Government. For someone borrowing $300,000 for their mortgage, they are paying $16,000 a year less than they were. Probably, in pre-tax terms, it is in the order of about $22,000 per year.
One of the reasons why interest rates are coming down in this country is that the Government has done a good job of getting the books back in order and of managing inflation expectations. It was not so long ago that her co-leader wanted to get the printing presses out in New Zealand and start printing money. That would have had interesting economic implications, as would her desire to see the poorest New Zealanders see all of their equity evaporate in housing when she takes all of that off them. I will be reminding New Zealanders of that in the months to come.
I suspect very few, and they probably have not for the last 30 or 40 years. The reality, though, is that for very low-income New Zealanders there is assistance from the Government. KiwiSaver HomeStart, for instance, has both income caps and other caps, and we are seeing around the country quite a lot of New Zealanders—in fact very low-income New Zealanders—accessing that. The Government is also providing additional support for them, with income-related rents into social housing—something we have never seen before. This Government, as we know, was the first Government in decades to raise benefits in this country. We have spent over $10 billion, actually, providing support to very low-income and low-income New Zealanders, in a vast variety of ways. The member gets up as if the Government is not out there supporting the most at-risk New Zealanders; in fact we are, every single day.
The member should not take it personally, but I do not want to accompany her anywhere. If she wants to know why, it is because I really do not want to hang with her.
Yes.
Yes, in the context I made it.
I think the member is wrong; the number is higher than that for GST. The Government has been investing very heavily in the tourism sector. It is one of the reasons why it is such an important part of the economy, and we saw 3.3 million international tourists come to New Zealand. What the Government is doing is—for the first time—providing that sort of support for councils. They are free to put in an application, and, I think, from the feedback that I have been getting both as Prime Minister and as Minister of Tourism, a lot of them are going to do that and be grateful. But to argue that that is the only thing that we are doing in terms of supporting tourists is a bit farcical. It includes the $140 million - odd every year we put into marketing. It includes the work we have done around black spots for mobile phones, ultra-fast broadband, and tourist facilities.
The Government's bank is the Reserve Bank—insomuch as we own it—or Kiwibank. Westpac is not the Government's bank. We might bank with it, but we do not own it.
The member would really need to ask the Minister for Economic Development to get the full regional plan for those particular areas, but, rest assured, there is one. He has been actively engaged with those communities. Actually, from memory—I may be proven wrong—I think it was the Mayor of Buller, actually, who was very, very supportive of the programme that was rolled out. Yes, there have been some issues in relation to mining, but to argue that the Government is responsible for that, given the downturn in commodity prices, is a novel one. If the member thinks he has got an answer to it, he should probably go and ring Malcolm Turnbull, because they happen to be having a few problems in Australia in relation to mining.
Yes. As I have noted in the House previously, New Zealand's homeownership rates peaked in the late 1980s and early 1990s, so this is a long-term trend under successive Governments. It is also in line with what has happened in many other countries. The Government is taking a number of steps to help first-home buyers, including the expanded $435 million KiwiSaver HomeStart grants and getting more houses built faster.
I suspect speculators have always been involved in the markets and at various times have made money. The Government is not stopping young people from being involved in houses. That is what the $435 million expanded homeownership programme is about, and we know that around about, I think, 90,000 people will benefit from that.
Firstly, they will be private properties that people own, and they have—
—made their own call—well, they have made their own call, actually, in that world, to allow them to decide what they want to do with it. But it is worth putting in a bit of perspective. Last year, in Auckland alone, nearly 32,000 properties were sold. If a small number of people think they should land bank it, well, that is their own personal choice.
There will be a variety of reasons why people do that, but the issue is not whether one or two people decide they want to hold a property and sell it to someone else; the question is whether others get an opportunity to do that. One of the ways they can do that is actually through the Government having a strong fiscal plan and managing the Government's resources and finances well. One of the ways we have seen that is that interest rates have halved under the National Government's leadership. They are now 5.4 percent. So for a family with a $300,000 floating mortgage rate, they are saving nearly $16,000 a year—that is a huge amount—under this Government.
No. I accept that it has had some challenges, but, as I said earlier, interest rates are half what they were. So if we were under Labour, those people would be paying $16,000 more after tax. That would be an issue. I simply point out that in the last 12 months alone 37 percent of all sales in Auckland—11,842 properties—were under the rate at which KiwiSaver HomeStart provides support.
No, and the only thing comprehensive was King Tuheitia's view that the Labour Party is toast.
Yes; and as I pointed out to his sidekick last week, in a stylish manner.
I do not think the member is accurately reflecting those. If he wants to put them down in writing, we can give him an update on each and every one of those.
The member would need to ask the Minister of Transport, and he can give an update.
Yes; according to the latest Building Activity Survey from Statistics New Zealand, the volume of residential building work in the latest March quarter is the highest since the series began back in the 1980s. That is up 40 percent since 2013, and an impressive 80 percent since the start of 2012. As I said in a speech last month, building consents are now at their highest level for over 11 years, and National's comprehensive housing plan is aimed squarely at increasing them further.
There is probably a likely shortfall at the moment, but what we know is that that gap is closing very rapidly, which will be assisted in part by the Auckland Unitary Plan and, actually, the fact that we are in the middle of the biggest building boom that New Zealand has ever seen.
I have not seen that data. I think that most people accept that one of those factors is migration, but, of course, migration goes through flows. We already saw it—and the cycle was easing back a little bit last week. So, overall, I think the generally received wisdom is that we need about 13,000 new properties a year in Auckland, and we are rapidly getting near that number.
It obviously has an impact in terms of what people have to pay for their homes—although I would point out that house prices nationally have gone up at under half the rate under this Government as they did under the previous Labour Government, and at about the same level in Auckland as they did under Labour. The one big advantage, of course, for New Zealanders now, with a National-led Government, is that interest rates are at a 70-year low and employment markets are very strong. The economy itself created 251,000 additional jobs in the last 3 years. In fact, things have got so good that even the Māori King says he will never vote for Labour again.
I do not have the details of the case, but I would refer the person to Work and Income.
The Government has been looking closely at the issue around emergency houses. It is one of the reasons why there was $41 million additional expenditure in Budget 2016 alone. It is why hundreds of millions has been put into social housing. It is why the Government has been ensuring that income-related rents are paid not only for Housing New Zealand homes but also for community housing providers for social housing. It is why there is more money being spent in Auckland for social housing.
I think that the member is incorrectly quoting those agencies.
Yes.
No.
I am not a technical expert, but it sounds logical.
No.
One thing we can be sure of is that this Government has done more than any Government in the history of New Zealand to clean up waterways, including setting national standards, pouring money into ensuring that our lakes and rivers are improved, and ensuring that New Zealanders can expect a high standard for water.
I have no basis to either confirm or deny that statement.
The terms of reference are very broad, and I do not think—as much as it suits the member's own political agenda and her followers'—that she should jump to conclusions about what the cause of the water concerns is.
I seek leave to move a motion without notice congratulating the members of the 2016 New Zealand Olympic team.
 I move, That this House congratulate the members of our record-breaking Olympic team on their outstanding performance in Rio. These inspiring New Zealanders did their country and themselves incredibly proud. They showed that there is no limit to what Kiwis can achieve when they set goals and work hard to attain them. Seeing New Zealanders not only excel but also carry themselves with such dignity and poise on the world stage reflects incredibly well on New Zealand, and is an inspiration to Kiwis young and old.

 This Government believes that if you give New Zealanders an equal crack on the world stage, they are capable of anything. These athletes have shown just that—that you can grow up in a town of several hundred, in a country of 4.7 million at the bottom of the South Pacific, and you can be a world beater; that it is possible to outrun, out-throw, out-leap, out-shoot, out-paddle, out-row, and out-sail the best that the world has to offer, if you are prepared to put in the hard work to make it so; and that there are opportunities for young New Zealand athletes outside of rugby fields and cricket grounds, because Rio saw our Olympians top the podium of nine different sports, and the 18 medals won represent our best ever medal haul, far surpassing the 13 won at Seoul and London in 1988 and 2012 respectively. It also saw us ranked 14th among 205 competing nations in terms of total medals won.

 We often say—because it is true—that New Zealand punches above its weight on the international stage, and it is something that Kiwis can, and do, take great pride in. Over the past 2 weeks we have witnessed the continued success of established stars like Mahe Drysdale, Lisa Carrington, and Val Adams, and we saw the emergence of new ones. Now young Kiwis can also look up to new heroes like Eliza McCartney, Luuka Jones, and Tom Walsh. They are just some of the New Zealanders representing us in Rio who set themselves the goal of being the best in the world, and who, through a mixture of hard work, ambition, talent, belief, and grit, can now say that they are.

 Although it is the athletes out there performing, they do not do this on their own. They have received amazing support from their coaches, physios, managers, and the staff at High Performance Sport New Zealand—and, of course, from their families, who spent all of that time ferrying their children to sailing regattas, to early morning swim training, and to gruelling long-distance running practices, and who, I have no doubt, are immensely proud. As a parent, I know how much time that takes, but also how it feels to stand back and watch your children chase and achieve their dreams.

 I would also like to praise the New Zealand Olympic Committee for its great work. A special mention must go to the chef de mission, Rob Waddell. There is something uniquely Kiwi about his reaction to arriving in Rio to find our athletes' quarters not quite ready. Rather than kicking up a fuss or leaving the hard work up to someone else, he rolled up his sleeves, along with his team, and they put the finishing touches on themselves. This is another example of the humility and work ethic our athletes are so famous for.

 I was also heartened to see Nikki Hamblin awarded the fair play award from the International Fair Play Committee. Nikki's selfless act—stopping her race to help the injured runner who had also helped her up—captured the hearts of people around the world. She demonstrated not only the Olympic spirit but the sense of fair play that is so much a part of our national character.

 All this means that the bar has been set high for our Paralympic athletes, who start their games in just over 2 weeks and who I am sure will continue to meet those standards. We wish them all the best, and they go with our full support.

 Can I finish by again congratulating all the members of the 2016 Olympic team on their achievements, on their work ethic, and on the way they represented us. They should take immense pride in that. But while they will no doubt be savouring their success, for many the job is not done and they will already be turning their attention to Tokyo in 2020. On the back of their performances in Rio, I have no doubt that they will continue to excel. To the athletes: New Zealand is proud of you, inspired by you, and remains firmly behind you. Today we recognise and we celebrate what has been achieved, but tomorrow we will once again focus on what we can do to help you continue to succeed.
Yes. I have the privilege of leading a Government that is ambitious for New Zealand's future, and our policies reflect that ambition.
The failure really was the metropolitan urban limit in Auckland that choked off land supply, which I am sure was one of the real lefty ideas that the Greens were promoting.
In answer to the first part of the question, yes, and if the member wants me to, I am more than happy to read out the statistics.
OK, so the member does want me to. All right. As of 30 June 2016 in Auckland, the advice my office has is that 1,300 homes have been completed, 2,200 building consents have been issued, 2,458 sections have been created, and 7,170 sections have been granted resource consent. Of the 154 special housing areas in Auckland, 26 have been built on, 15 have earthworks, and 88 are in some stage of planning process. Only 25 have no consent or plan change lodged, but 16 of those were declared between February and May of this year. I think most people would acknowledge that a special housing area is a way of fast-tracking the development of these properties, but they still need to have Resource Management Act consent, they still have to have horizontal infrastructure, they still need to—
Well, we did not have them 8 years ago, Phil. What we had was the metropolitan urban limit, which we inherited from your lefty mates.
The member is quite incorrect, and in fact the data I have given to the House is correct. But what I do not support is the hard-working young couple who go out and buy a house, who borrow money against the equity that they have put down, only to see that house price halve. That member has launched a war on the poor. She is saying to the poorest New Zealanders who are borrowing money against their property that she wants to see them owing the bank more than their house is worth. I think there is a reason why the Greens' numbers are tumbling, and that is because people can see that.
Given that only a very small proportion either do not have planning under way, earthworks under way, or building on them, I would say that special housing areas have been highly effective, actually, as a way of releasing land. There will be one or two that do not go ahead—it was never guaranteed that they would, but what was guaranteed was that they would allow process to happen more rapidly, and that is exactly what is happening. What the member is trying to tell New Zealanders is that at the moment that the Minister of Housing designates an area a special housing area—
Well, firstly, I think we can see that special housing areas are a success, because houses are being built and development is taking place. But I will give the member a clue of what a terse letter would look like: "Dear Mr and Mrs Bloggs of Auckland. I know you borrowed $450,000 from the ANZ against your $100,000 worth of equity—or $150,000—in your $600,000 property. But now Metiria Turei has managed to turn that into a $300,000 property, and therefore could you sell your property with no equity left." That is what a 50 percent reduction in house prices would look like. It is a war—
—on the poor.
I stand by my full statement, which went on to say "But just think of the things we have done over the last 2 years alone". To say we have done nothing is absolutely not true. We have done a lot. So let me remind the House about the Government's comprehensive housing plan. It includes a new $1 billion dollar Housing Infrastructure Fund, over 210 special housing areas for 70,000 new homes, an expanded HomeStart scheme to first-home buyers, the National Policy Statement on Urban Development, Resource Management Act reform, a raft of extra tax measures, the new Auckland Unitary Plan, more tools for the Reserve Bank, the independent urban development authority's finding some areas of high housing need, and getting the Auckland Unitary Plan under way. By any measure, this is a comprehensive plan.
Of course there will be a range of incomes and a range of properties. One thing I do know is that wage growth under this Government has been in the better part of 25 percent in the 8 years that we have been in Government. Interest rates have plummeted to where they were under the previous Labour Government. If we look at the number of properties sold for under $650,000 in Auckland for the previous year, it was 37 percent of properties—at 11,842. And—out of interest—if one was to take a cursory look at TradeMe, as I did just before, around Auckland houses, apartments, townhouses, and units listed for sale at $600,000 and below, it lists 1,433 listings.
Everyone appreciates that special housing areas (SHAs) are a fast-track process and a fast-track zoning process, so of course it takes some time for those properties ultimately to have the horizontal infrastructure, and the like. But, for the record, the advice that my office has received is that as of 30 June 2016, when it comes to Auckland's SHAs, 1,300 homes have been completed, 2,200 building consents have been issued, 2,458 new sections have been created, and 7,170 new sections have been granted resource consent. Of the 154 SHAs in Auckland, 26 have been built on, with the capacity of 29,800; 15 have earthworks under way, with the capacity of 5,300; and 88 are in some stage of the planning process. Only 25 SHAs have no consents—
—of which 16 were declared SHAs in February to May of this year.
As you can see from the data I just read out to the House—and I will not repeat it, in the interests of time—there is no evidence, I think, to support that there is land banking.
If one looks at the household labour force survey out today, at 5.1 percent, at the jobs that have been created in the 8 years under this Government, at the level of interest rates in New Zealand now, and at the wage growth that has taken place—again under this Government, at 25 percent, and in real terms about 13 percent—I do not think it is true to say that people have given up. But certainly the Government has a number of responses, and one of those to help those first-home buyers is the KiwiSaver HomeStart programme, and I think that has been very successful.
Obviously I do not know the couple whom the member talks of, and I do not know their income and their circumstances. What I do know is that with interest rates at the levels that they are, with the job growth we are seeing, and, actually, with the prospects for New Zealand, I think there are a lot of young couples who would argue pretty strongly that they are out there, buying houses. There is one particular story, I think in the New Zealand Herald, about that, just today.
The only thing comprehensive was the way he abused Nick Leggett last week and the way Grant Robertson abused Liz MacPherson.
Yes, with one clarification: when I said yesterday that the numbers of people who come to New Zealand and claim refugee status or asylum are significantly fewer under this Government than when the Rt Hon Winston Peters was a Minister, I should have said that the proportion who claim was less.
The last sentence was: I should have said that the proportion who claim was less.
As I said in my answer to the primary question, I stand by the view that that is correct when it is taken with the word "proportion".
You will have to take up the written question with the Minister's office. I cannot answer that, and I have not actually even seen that parliamentary question, but in the information provided to my office—I can give the member an example, if he wants. If you go back and have a look, for instance, at the 2005-06 period, the number of people who temporarily came to New Zealand was 498,009, on the advice I had. The number of people who claimed for asylum was 317. The proportion was 0.063653468. In the 2015-16 equivalent, the number was 925,365, the number of people who made claims was 339, and the proportion was 0.036634193.
Yes, I do have confidence in the Minister. As the Minister went on to say, it would be naive to think there are not barriers to employment for some New Zealanders. The Government is working extremely hard to remove those barriers and ensure that every young New Zealander is fit for work.
Precisely—but I am fairly sure it will be because they are in different locations. Of course, for the average New Zealand employer, they would far rather take someone on locally because it is an easier process to go through, by definition. As you see with something like the Christchurch rebuild, they need an enormous number of workers over a short period of time and, frankly, a lot of people were not prepared to move to Christchurch.
What I can guarantee is that the Government looks at the issues of where skills are required, and over the last 3 years, 56 occupations have been taken off the list and only five have been added. The reality is that, as I said, there are often mismatches between where the demand is for people and where people actually live. So that is primarily the issue. You can see from the fact that there are so many jobs being created and the unemployment rate is falling that, broadly, it is working, but people will not always move location.
That might be the line that the unions that made him the leader want him to say, but the truth is that wages are up—wait for it—25 percent in the 8 years that we have been the Government. Real wage growth has been 13 percent since 2008. That is significantly greater than the 9 years under the previous Labour Government, when inflation took away pretty much all of the pay rises that the workers got.
I think the member has successfully asked and answered his own question, and he has done a better job of both of them than probably I could do.
I do not think that is an accurate reflection of the way both Treasury and MBIE view migration. I think they have made the case that we need to constantly be looking at who is coming in and why and whether it is possible to get New Zealand workers—and, of course, that is something that the Government is doing. And through the Business Growth Agenda, we have had a significant programme of big employers training people. We have got more people in apprenticeships. There is a huge amount of work going on. But the reality is that some work is part-time. This is not a new thing: it was under the previous Labour Government that the Recognised Seasonal Employee scheme was introduced to New Zealand, for the very reason of supporting our agricultural and horticultural sectors, and when that was happening it was very successful.
Well, there is one person who has lost his job—and that is David Cunliffe, because he led the Labour Party to its worst result in the history of the party.
I have seen one report that started by stating: "I welcome all people who want to make a future for themselves and their families to be part of our beautiful country." I could not agree more with that. I saw another report that said: "I would never want for anyone in this country to feel like they are somehow being targeted."—that was, of course, from Andrew Little, just a day after he called for a ban on Chinese and Indian chefs.
Interestingly enough, actually, there has been a bit of talk about this 210,000 work visa number. I think my office went away and had a look at the number back in 2008, and the number was, broadly, about the same, give or take a little bit, on working holiday programmes—some fluctuation in the categories, but the numbers are broadly the same. I think they are broadly about the same. I think the big difference, really, in migration flows in this period of time has been that instead of 35,000 Kiwis leaving every year to go to Australia, New Zealanders have come home and stayed here, because under a National-led Government they can see a brighter future, they are ambitious for New Zealand, they have got a 25 percent wage increase, and they are doing pretty well. I think it is only natural that they would come back and want to be part of it.
There are a great many more Kiwis in work. For a start, over the last 3 years alone, 200,000 jobs have been created, and we forecast that there will be another 170,000 over the next 3 or 4 years. There are a considerable number of Kiwis going through a variety of different programmes, as I mentioned earlier. The unemployment rate under this Government is now falling, after the global financial crisis. So there is no question that there are Kiwis going into work. What there is is a genuine mismatch in some parts of the country to the other and, actually, it would be great if some people where there are high levels of unemployment or where there are not so many opportunities would move to parts of the country where there are—but it is not as easy, always, for them to do that.
What I have said is that migration is an important part of a growing economy, and it is actually a sign of success that people want to come to New Zealand either on working holiday programmes or because they are coming here to fill the skilled migrant demand. The Government constantly looks at—
Well, wages are going up faster than inflation. I know it does not suit the member's argument, and I know the unions put him in his job, but he is going to have to go back and tell them: "Mate, the facts don't add up."—the Little rhetoric that got you your job.
